<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto the Fifth: The Fête</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal">the Fifth</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">The Fête<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-57" id="noteref-57" epub:type="noteref">57</a></p>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“Oh, do not dream these fearful dreams,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">O my Svetlana.”</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Joukóvski</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<section id="canto-5-1" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>That year the autumn season late</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kept lingering on as loath to go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All Nature winter seemed to await,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till January fell no snow⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The third at night. Tattiana wakes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betimes, and sees, when morning breaks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Park, garden, palings, yard below</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And roofs near morn blanched o’er with snow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the windows tracery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The trees in silvery array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down in the courtyard magpies gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the far mountains daintily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’erspread with Winter’s carpet bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All so distinct, and all so white!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-2" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Winter! The peasant blithely goes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To labour in his sledge forgot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His pony sniffing the fresh snows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just manages a feeble trot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though deep he sinks into the drift;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth the kibitka gallops swift,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-58" id="noteref-58" epub:type="noteref">58</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its driver seated on the rim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In scarlet sash and sheepskin trim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yonder the household lad doth run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Placed in a sledge his terrier black,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himself transformed into a hack;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To freeze his finger hath begun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He laughs, although it aches from cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His mother from the door doth scold.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-3" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>In scenes like these it may be though,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye feel but little interest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They are all natural and low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are not with elegance impressed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another bard with art divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath pictured in his gorgeous line</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first appearance of the snows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the joys which Winter knows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He will delight you, I am sure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he in ardent verse portrays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Secret excursions made in sleighs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But competition I abjure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Either with him or thee in song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bard of the Finnish maiden young.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-59" id="noteref-59" epub:type="noteref">59</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-4" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Tattiana, Russian to the core,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Herself not knowing well the reason,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Russian winter did adore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the cold beauties of the season:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On sunny days the glistening rime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sledging, the snows, which at the time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sunset glow with rosy light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The misty evenings ere Twelfth Night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These evenings as in days of old</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Làrinas would celebrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The servants used to congregate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the young ladies fortunes told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every year distributed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Journeys and warriors to wed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-5" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Tattiana in traditions old</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Believed, the people’s wisdom weird,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In dreams and what the moon foretold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what she from the cards inferred.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Omens inspired her soul with fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mysteriously all objects near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hidden meaning could impart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Presentiments oppressed her heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! the prim cat upon the stove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With one paw strokes her face and purrs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana certainly infers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That guests approach: and when above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The new moon’s crescent slim she spied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suddenly to the left hand side,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-6" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>She trembled and grew deadly pale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or a swift meteor, may be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Across the gloom of heaven would sail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And disappear in space; then she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would haste in agitation dire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mutter her concealed desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere the bright messenger had set.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When in her walks abroad she met</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A friar black approaching near,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-60" id="noteref-60" epub:type="noteref">60</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or a swift hare from mead to mead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had run across her path at speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wholly beside herself with fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anticipating woe she pined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Certain misfortune near opined.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-7" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Wherefore? She found a secret joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In horror for itself alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus Nature doth our souls alloy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus her perversity hath shown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twelfth Night approaches. Merry eves!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-61" id="noteref-61" epub:type="noteref">61</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thoughtless youth whom nothing grieves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before whose inexperienced sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life lies extended, vast and bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To peer into the future tries.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old age through spectacles too peers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although the destined coffin nears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Having lost all in life we prize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It matters not. Hope e’en to these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With childlike lisp will lie to please.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-8" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Tattiana gazed with curious eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On melted wax in water poured;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The clue unto some mystery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She deemed its outline might afford.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rings from a dish of water full</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In order due the maidens pull;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when Tattiana’s hand had ta’en</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A ring she heard the ancient strain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>The peasants there are rich as kings,</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>They shovel silver with a spade,</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>He whom we sing to shall be made</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Happy and glorious</i>. But this brings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sad refrain misfortune near.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Girls the <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">kashourka</i> much prefer.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-62" id="noteref-62" epub:type="noteref">62</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-9" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Frosty the night; the heavens shone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wondrous host of heavenly spheres</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sailed silently in unison⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana in the yard appears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a half-open dressing-gown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bends her mirror on the moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But trembling on the mirror dark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sad moon only could remark.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>List! the snow crunches⁠—he draws nigh!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The girl on tiptoe forward bounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her voice sweeter than the sounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of clarinet or flute doth cry:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What is your name?” The boor looked dazed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And “Agathon” replied, amazed.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-63" id="noteref-63" epub:type="noteref">63</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-10" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Tattiana (nurse the project planned)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By night prepared for sorcery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the bathroom did command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lay two covers secretly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But sudden fear assailed Tattiana,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, remembering Svetlana,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-64" id="noteref-64" epub:type="noteref">64</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Become alarmed. So never mind!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’m not for witchcraft now inclined.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So she her silken sash unlaced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Undressed herself and went to bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soon Lel hovered o’er her head.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-65" id="noteref-65" epub:type="noteref">65</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath her downy pillow placed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little virgin mirror peeps.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis silent all. Tattiana sleeps.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-11" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>A dreadful sleep Tattiana sleeps.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She dreamt she journeyed o’er a field</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All covered up with snow in heaps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By melancholy fogs concealed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid the snowdrifts which surround</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A stream, by winter’s ice unbound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impetuously clove its way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With boiling torrent dark and gray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two poles together glued by ice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fragile bridge and insecure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spanned the unbridled torrent o’er;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside the thundering abyss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana in despair unfeigned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rooted unto the spot remained.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-12" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>As if against obstruction sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana o’er the stream complained;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To help her to the other shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No one appeared to lend a hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But suddenly a snowdrift stirs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what from its recess appears?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bristly bear of monstrous size!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He roars, and “Ah!” Tattiana cries.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He offers her his murderous paw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She nerves herself from her alarm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And leans upon the monster’s arm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With footsteps tremulous with awe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Passes the torrent. But alack!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bruin is marching at her back!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-13" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>She, to turn back her eyes afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Accelerates her hasty pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But cannot anyhow evade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her shaggy myrmidon in chase.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bear rolls on with many a grunt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A forest now she sees in front</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fir-trees standing motionless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In melancholy loveliness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their branches by the snow bowed down.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through aspens, limes and birches bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shining orbs of night appear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no path; the storm hath strewn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both bush and brake, ravine and steep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all in snow is buried deep.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-14" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The wood she enters⁠—bear behind⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In snow she sinks up to the knee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now a long branch itself entwined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around her neck, now violently</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away her golden earrings tore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now the sweet little shoes she wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grown clammy, stick fast in the snow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her handkerchief she loses now;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No time to pick it up! afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She hears the bear behind her press,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor dares the skirting of her dress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For shame lift up the modest maid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She runs, the bear upon her trail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until her powers of running fail.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-15" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>She sank upon the snow. But Bruin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adroitly seized and carried her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Submissive as if in a swoon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She cannot draw a breath or stir.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He dragged her by a forest road</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till amid trees a hovel showed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By barren snow heaped up and bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tangled wilderness around.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bright blazed the window of the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within resounded shriek and shout:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My chum lives here,” Bruin grunts out.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Warm yourself here a little space!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Straight for the entrance then he made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her upon the threshold laid.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-16" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Recovering, Tania gazes round;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bear gone⁠—she at the threshold placed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inside clink glasses, cries resound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if it were some funeral feast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But deeming all this nonsense pure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She peeped through a chink of the door.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What doth she see? Around the board</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sit many monstrous shapes abhorred.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A canine face with horns thereon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another with cock’s head appeared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here an old witch with hirsute beard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There an imperious skeleton;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dwarf adorned with tail, again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shape half cat and half a crane.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-17" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Yet ghastlier, yet more wonderful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A crab upon a spider rides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perched on a goose’s neck a skull</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In scarlet cap revolving glides.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A windmill too a jig performs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wildly waves its arms and storms;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Barking, songs, whistling, laughter coarse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The speech of man and tramp of horse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wide Tattiana oped her eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When in that company she saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him who inspired both love and awe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hero we immortalize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin sat the table by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And viewed the door with cunning eye.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-18" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>All bustle when he makes a sign:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He drinks, all drink and loudly call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He smiles, in laughter all combine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knits his brows⁠—’tis silent all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He there is master⁠—that is plain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana courage doth regain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grown more curious by far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just placed the entrance door ajar.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wind rose instantly, blew out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fire of the nocturnal lights;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A trouble fell upon the sprites;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin lightning glances shot;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Furious he from the table rose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All arise. To the door he goes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-19" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Terror assails her. Hastily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana would attempt to fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She cannot⁠—then impatiently</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She strains her throat to force a cry⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She cannot⁠—Eugene oped the door</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the young girl appeared before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those hellish phantoms. Peals arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of frantic laughter, and all eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hoofs and crooked snouts and paws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tails which a bushy tuft adorns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whiskers and bloody tongues and horns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sharp rows of tushes, bony claws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are turned upon her. All combine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In one great shout: she’s mine! she’s mine!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-20" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Mine!” cried Eugene with savage tone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The troop of apparitions fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the frosty night alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remained with him the youthful maid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With tranquil air Onegin leads</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana to a corner, bids</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her on a shaky bench sit down;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His head sinks slowly, rests upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her shoulder⁠—Olga swiftly came⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Lenski followed⁠—a light broke⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His fist Onegin fiercely shook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gazed around with eyes of flame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The unbidden guests he roughly chides⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana motionless abides.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-21" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The strife grew furious and Eugene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grasped a long knife and instantly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Struck Lenski dead⁠—across the scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dark shadows thicken⁠—a dread cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was uttered, and the cabin shook⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana terrified awoke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She gazed around her⁠—it was day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! through the frozen windows play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aurora’s ruddy rays of light⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The door flew open⁠—Olga came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More blooming than the Boreal flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And swifter than the swallow’s flight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Come,” she cried, “sister, tell me e’en</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom you in slumber may have seen.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-22" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But she, her sister never heeding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With book in hand reclined in bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Page after page continued reading,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But no reply unto her made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although her book did not contain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bard’s enthusiastic strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor precepts sage nor pictures e’en,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet neither Virgil nor Racine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor Byron, Walter Scott, nor Seneca,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine" xml:lang="fr">Journal des Modes</i>, I vouch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever absorbed a maid so much:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its name, my friends, was <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Martin Zadeka</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The chief of the Chaldean wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who dreams expound and prophecies.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-23" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Brought by a pedlar vagabond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto their solitude one day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This monument of thought profound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana purchased with a stray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tome of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Malvina</i>, and but three<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-66" id="noteref-66" epub:type="noteref">66</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a half rubles down gave she;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Also, to equalise the scales,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She got a book of nursery tales,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A grammar, likewise Petriads two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Marmontel also, tome the third;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana every day conferred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Martin Zadeka</i>. In woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She consolation thence obtained⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inseparable they remained.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-24" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The dream left terror in its train.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not knowing its interpretation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tania the meaning would obtain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of such a dread hallucination.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana to the index flies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And alphabetically tries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The words <i>bear, bridge, fir, darkness, bog,</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Raven, snowstorm, tempest, fog,</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Et cetera</i>; but nothing showed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Martin Zadeka</i> in aid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though the foul vision promise made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a most mournful episode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many a day thereafter laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A load of care upon the maid.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-25" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“But lo! forth from the valleys dun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With purple hand Aurora leads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swift following in her wake, the sun,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-67" id="noteref-67" epub:type="noteref">67</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a grand festival proceeds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Làrinas were since sunrise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’erwhelmed with guests; by families</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The neighbours come, in sledge approach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i xml:lang="ru-Latn">Britzka</i>, kibitka, or in coach.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crush and confusion in the hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Latest arrivals’ salutations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Barking, young ladies’ osculations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shouts, laughter, jamming ’gainst the wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bows and the scrape of many feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nurses who scream and babes who bleat.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-26" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Bringing his partner corpulent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fat Poustiakoff drove to the door;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gvozdine, a landlord excellent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oppressor of the wretched poor;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Skatènines, aged pair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all their progeny were there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who from two years to thirty tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pétòushkoff, the provincial swell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bouyànoff too, my cousin, wore<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-68" id="noteref-68" epub:type="noteref">68</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>His wadded coat and cap with peak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Surely you know him as I speak);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Fliànoff, pensioned councillor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rogue and extortioner of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now buffoon, glutton, and a bore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-27" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The family of Kharlikoff,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came with Monsieur Triquet, a prig,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who arrived lately from Tamboff,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In spectacles and chestnut wig.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a true Frenchman, couplets wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Tania’s praise in pouch he brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Known unto children perfectly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i xml:lang="fr">Reveillez-vouz, belle endormie</i>.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among some ancient ballads thrust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He found them in an almanac,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sagacious Triquet back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To light had brought them from their dust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst he “belle Nina” had the face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By “belle Tattiana” to replace.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-28" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Lo! from the nearest barrack came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of old maids the divinity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And comfort of each country dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The captain of a company.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He enters. Ah! good news to-day!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The military band will play.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The colonel sent it. Oh! delight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So there will be a dance to-night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Girls in anticipation skip!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But dinner-time comes. Two and two</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They hand in hand to table go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The maids beside Tattiana keep⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men opposite. The cross they sign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And chattering loud sit down to dine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-29" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Ceased for a space all chattering.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jaws are at work. On every side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Plates, knives and forks are clattering</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ringing wine-glasses are plied.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But by degrees the crowd begin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To raise a clamour and a din:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They laugh, they argue, and they bawl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They shout and no one lists at all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The doors swing open: Lenski makes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His entrance with Onegin. “Ah!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last the author!” cries Mamma.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The guests make room; aside each takes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His chair, plate, knife and fork in haste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The friends are called and quickly placed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-30" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Right opposite Tattiana placed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She, than the morning moon more pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More timid than a doe long chased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lifts not her eyes which swimming fail.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anew the flames of passion start</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within her; she is sick at heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The two friends’ compliments she hears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not, and a flood of bitter tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With effort she restrains. Well nigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The poor girl fell into a faint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But strength of mind and self-restraint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prevailed at last. She in reply</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said something in an undertone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the table sat her down.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-31" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>To tragedy, the fainting fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And female tears hysterical,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin could not now submit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For long he had endured them all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our misanthrope was full of ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At a great feast against desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And marking Tania’s agitation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cast down his eyes in trepidation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sulked in silent indignation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swearing how Lenski he would rile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Avenge himself in proper style.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Triumphant by anticipation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Caricatures he now designed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the guests within his mind.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-32" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Certainly not Eugene alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana’s trouble might have spied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that the eyes of every one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By a rich pie were occupied⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unhappily too salt by far;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that a bottle sealed with tar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appeared, Don’s effervescing boast,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-69" id="noteref-69" epub:type="noteref">69</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between the blanc-mange and the roast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behind, of glasses an array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tall, slender, like thy form designed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Zizi, thou mirror of my mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair object of my guileless lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seductive cup of love, whose flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made me so tipsy long ago!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-33" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>From the moist cork the bottle freed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With loud explosion, the bright wine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hissed forth. With serious air indeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long tortured by his lay divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Triquet arose, and for the bard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The company deep silence guard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tania well nigh expired when he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turned to her and discordantly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Intoned it, manuscript in hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Voices and hands applaud, and she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must bow in common courtesy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The poet, modest though so grand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drank to her health in the first place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then handed her the song with grace.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-34" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Congratulations, toasts resound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana thanks to all returned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, when Onegin’s turn came round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The maiden’s weary eye which yearned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her agitation and distress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aroused in him some tenderness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He bowed to her nor silence broke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But somehow there shone in his look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The witching light of sympathy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know not if his heart felt pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or if he meant to flirt again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From habit or maliciously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But kindness from his eye had beamed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to revive Tattiana seemed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-35" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The chairs are thrust back with a roar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The crowd unto the drawing-room speeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As bees who leave their dainty store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seek in buzzing swarms the meads.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Contented and with victuals stored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neighbour by neighbour sat and snored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Matrons unto the fireplace go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Maids in the corner whisper low;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold! green tables are brought forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And testy gamesters do engage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In boston and the game of age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ombre, and whist all others worth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A strong resemblance these possess⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All sons of mental weariness.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-36" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Eight rubbers were already played,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eight times the heroes of the fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Change of position had essayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When tea was brought. ’Tis my delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time to denote by dinner, tea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And supper. In the country we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can count the time without much fuss⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stomach doth admonish us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, by the way, I here assert</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That for that matter in my verse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As many dinners I rehearse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As oft to meat and drink advert,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thou, great Homer, didst of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom thirty centuries adore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-37" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I will with thy divinity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Contend with knife and fork and platter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But grant with magnanimity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’m beaten in another matter;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy heroes, sanguinary wights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Also thy rough-and-tumble fights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy Venus and thy Jupiter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More advantageously appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than cold Onegin’s oddities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The aspect of a landscape drear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or e’en Istòmina, my dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fashion’s gay frivolities;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But my Tattiana, on my soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is sweeter than thy Helen foul.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-38" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>No one the contrary will urge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though for his Helen Menelaus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again a century should scourge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Us, and like Trojan warriors slay us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though around honoured Priam’s throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Troy’s sages should in concert own</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once more, when she appeared in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paris and Menelaus right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as to fighting⁠—’twill appear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For patience, reader, I must plead!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little farther please to read</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be not in advance severe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’ll be a fight. I do not lie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My word of honour given have I.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-39" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The tea, as I remarked, appeared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But scarce had maids their saucers ta’en</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When in the grand saloon was heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of bassoons and of flutes the strain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His soul by crash of music fired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His tea with rum no more desired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Paris of those country parts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Olga Petoushkova darts:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Tania Lenski; Kharlikova,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A marriageable maid matured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The poet from Tamboff secured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bouyànoff whisked off Poustiakova.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All to the grand saloon are gone⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ball in all its splendour shone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-40" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I tried when I began this tale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(See the first canto if ye will),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A ball in Peter’s capital,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sketch ye in Albano’s style.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-70" id="noteref-70" epub:type="noteref">70</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But by fantastic dreams distraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My memory wandered wide and sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The feet of my dear lady friends.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O feet, where’er your path extends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I long enough deceived have erred.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The perfidies I recollect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should make me much more circumspect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reform me both in deed and word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this fifth canto ought to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From such digressions wholly free.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-41" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The whirlwind of the waltz sweeps by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Undeviating and insane</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As giddy youth’s hilarity⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pair after pair the race sustain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The moment for revenge, meanwhile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Espying, Eugene with a smile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Approaches Olga and the pair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid the company career.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon the maid on a chair he seats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begins to talk of this and that,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when two minutes she had sat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again the giddy waltz repeats.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All are amazed; but Lenski he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarce credits what his eyes can see.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-42" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Hark! the mazurka. In times past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the mazurka used to peal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All rattled in the ball-room vast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The parquet cracked beneath the heel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And jolting jarred the window-frames.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis not so now. Like gentle dames</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We glide along a floor of wax.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>However, the mazurka lacks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nought of its charms original</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In country towns, where still it keeps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its stamping, capers and high leaps.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fashion is there immutable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who tyrannizes us with ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of modern Russians the disease.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-43" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Bouyànoff, wrathful cousin mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the hero of this lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Olga and Tania led. Malign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin Olga bore away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gliding in negligent career,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He bending whispered in her ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some madrigal not worth a rush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pressed her hand⁠—the crimson blush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon her cheek by adulation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grew brighter still. But Lenski hath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seen all, beside himself with wrath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hot with jealous indignation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till the mazurka’s close he stays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her hand for the cotillon prays.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-44" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>She fears she cannot.⁠—Cannot? Why?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She promised Eugene, or she would</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With great delight.⁠—O God on high!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heard he the truth? And thus she could⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And can it be? But late a child</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now a fickle flirt and wild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cunning already to display</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And well-instructed to betray!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lenski the stroke could not sustain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At womankind he growled a curse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Departed, ordered out his horse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And galloped home. But pistols twain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pair of bullets⁠—nought beside⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His fate shall presently decide.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
