<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto the Eighth: The Great World</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal">the Eighth</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">The Great World<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-90" id="noteref-90" epub:type="noteref">90</a></p>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“Fare thee well, and if for ever,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still for ever fare thee well.”</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Byron</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<section id="canto-8-1" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>In the Lyceum’s noiseless shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in a garden when I grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I Apuleius gladly read</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But would not look at Cicero.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas then in valleys lone, remote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In springtime, heard the cygnet’s note</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By waters shining tranquilly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That first the Muse appeared to me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the study of the boy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There came a sudden flash of light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Muse revealed her first delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sang childhood’s pastimes and its joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glory with which our history teems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the heart’s agitated dreams.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-2" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And the world met her smilingly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A first success light pinions gave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The old Derjavine noticed me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And blest me, sinking to the grave.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-91" id="noteref-91" epub:type="noteref">91</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then my companions young with pleasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the unfettered hours of leisure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her utterances ever heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by a partial temper stirred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And boiling o’er with friendly heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They first of all my brow did wreathe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And an encouragement did breathe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That my coy Muse might sing more sweet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O triumphs of my guileless days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How sweet a dream your memories raise!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-3" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Passion’s wild sway I then allowed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her promptings unto law did make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pursuits I followed of the crowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sportive Muse I used to take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To many a noisy feast and fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Terror of guardians of the night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wild festivities among</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She brought with her the gift of song.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a Bacchante in her sport</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside the cup she sang her rhymes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the young revellers of past times</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vociferously paid her court,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, amid the friendly crowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of my light paramour was proud.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-4" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But I abandoned their array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fled afar⁠—she followed me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How oft the kindly Muse away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath whiled the road’s monotony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Entranced me by some mystic tale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How oft beneath the moonbeams pale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Leonora did she ride<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-92" id="noteref-92" epub:type="noteref">92</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>With me Caucasian rocks beside!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How oft to the Crimean shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She led me through nocturnal mist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the sounding sea to list,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where Nereids murmur evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where the billows hoarsely raise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To God eternal hymns of praise.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-5" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Then, the far capital forgot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its splendour and its blandishments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In poor Moldavia cast her lot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She visited the humble tents</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of migratory gipsy hordes⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wild among them grew her words⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our godlike tongue she could exchange</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For savage speech, uncouth and strange,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ditties of the steppe she loved.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But suddenly all changed around!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! in my garden was she found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as a country damsel roved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pensive sorrow in her glance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in her hand a French romance.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-6" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Now for the first time I my Muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lead into good society,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her steppe-like beauties I peruse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With jealous fear, anxiety.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through dense aristocratic rows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of diplomats and warlike beaux</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And supercilious dames she glides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sits down and gazes on all sides⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amazed at the confusing crowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Variety of speech and vests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deliberate approach of guests</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who to the youthful hostess bowed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the dark fringe of men, like frames</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enclosing pictures of fair dames.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-7" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Assemblies oligarchical</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Please her by their decorum fixed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rigour of cold pride and all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Titles and ages intermixed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But who in that choice company</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With clouded brow stands silently?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unknown to all he doth appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A vision desolate and drear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth seem to him the festal scene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth his brow wretchedness declare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or suffering pride? Why is he there?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who may he be? Is it Eugene?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pray is it he? It is the same.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And is it long since back he came?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-8" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Is he the same or grown more wise?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still doth the misanthrope appear?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has returned, say in what guise?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What is his latest character?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What doth he act? Is it Melmoth,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-93" id="noteref-93" epub:type="noteref">93</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Philanthropist or patriot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Childe Harold, quaker, devotee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or other mask donned playfully?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or a good fellow for the nonce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like you and me and all the rest?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But this is my advice, ’twere best</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to behave as he did once⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Society he duped enow.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Is he known to you?”⁠—“Yes and No.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-9" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Wherefore regarding him express</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perverse, unfavourable views?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is it that human restlessness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ever carps, condemns, pursues?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is it that ardent souls of flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By recklessness amuse or shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Selfish nonentities around?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That mind which yearns for space is bound?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that too often we receive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Professions eagerly for deeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That crass stupidity misleads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That we by cant ourselves deceive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That mediocrity alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without disgust we look upon?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-10" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Happy he who in youth was young,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Happy who timely grew mature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who life’s frosts which early wrung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath gradually learnt to endure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By visions who was ne’er deranged</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor from the mob polite estranged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At twenty who was prig or swell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At thirty who was married well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At fifty who relief obtained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From public and from private ties,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who glory, wealth and dignities</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath tranquilly in turn attained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unto whom we all allude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to a worthy man and good!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-11" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But sad is the reflection made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain was youth by us received,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That we her constantly betrayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she at last hath us deceived;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That our desires which noblest seemed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The purest of the dreams we dreamed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have one by one all withered grown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like rotten leaves by Autumn strown⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis fearful to anticipate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nought but of dinners a long row,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To look on life as on a show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eternally to imitate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The seemly crowd, partaking nought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its passions and its modes of thought.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-12" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The butt of scandal having been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis dreadful⁠—ye agree, I hope⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pass with reasonable men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For a fictitious misanthrope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A visionary mortified,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or monster of Satanic pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or e’en the “Demon” of my strain.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-94" id="noteref-94" epub:type="noteref">94</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin⁠—take him up again⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In duel having killed his friend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And reached, with nought his mind to engage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The twenty-sixth year of his age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wearied of leisure in the end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without profession, business, wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knew not how to spend his life.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-13" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Him a disquietude did seize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wish from place to place to roam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A very troublesome disease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In some a willing martyrdom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abandoned he his country seat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of woods and fields the calm retreat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where every day before his eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A blood-bespattered shade would rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And aimless journeys did commence⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still remembrance to him clings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His travels like all other things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inspired but weariness intense;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Returning, from his ship amid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A ball he fell as Tchatzki did.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-95" id="noteref-95" epub:type="noteref">95</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-14" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Behold, the crowd begins to stir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A whisper runs along the hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lady draws the hostess near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behind her a grave general.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her manners were deliberate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reserved, but not inanimate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her eyes no saucy glance address,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was no angling for success.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her features no grimaces bleared;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of affectation innocent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Calm and without embarrassment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A faithful model she appeared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of “comme il faut.” Shishkòff, forgive!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I can’t translate the adjective.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-96" id="noteref-96" epub:type="noteref">96</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-15" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Ladies in crowds around her close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her with a smile old women greet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The men salute with lower bows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And watch her eye’s full glance to meet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Maidens before her meekly move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the hall, and high above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The crowd doth head and shoulders rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The general who accompanies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None could her beautiful declare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet viewing her from head to foot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None could a trace of that impute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in the elevated sphere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of London life is “vulgar” called</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ruthless fashion hath blackballed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-16" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I like this word exceedingly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although it will not bear translation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With us ’tis quite a novelty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not high in general estimation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twould serve ye in an epigram⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But turn we once more to our dame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enchanting, but unwittingly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At table she was sitting by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brilliant Nina Voronskoi,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Neva’s Cleopatra, and</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None the conviction could withstand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Nina’s marble symmetry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though dazzling its effulgence white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could not eclipse her neighbour’s light.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-17" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“And is it,” meditates Eugene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And is it she? It must be⁠—no⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How! from the waste of steppes unseen,”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the eternal lorgnette through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frequent and rapid doth his glance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seek the forgotten countenance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Familiar to him long ago.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Inform me, prince, pray dost thou know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lady in the crimson cap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who with the Spanish envoy speaks?”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The prince’s eye Onegin seeks:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ah! long the world hath missed thy shape!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But stop! I will present thee, if</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You choose.”⁠—“But who is she?”⁠—“My wife.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-18" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“So thou art wed! I did not know.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long ago?”⁠—“ ’Tis the second year.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“To⁠—?”⁠—“Làrina.”⁠—“Tattiana?”⁠—“So.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dost thou know her?”⁠—“We live near.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Then come with me.” The prince proceeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His wife approaches, with him leads</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His relative and friend as well.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lady’s glance upon him fell⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though her soul might be confused,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And vehemently though amazed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She on the apparition gazed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No signs of trouble her accused,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mien unaltered she preserved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her bow was easy, unreserved.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-19" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Ah no! no faintness her attacked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor sudden turned she red or white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her brow she did not e’en contract</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor yet her lip compressed did bite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though he surveyed her at his ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not the least trace Onegin sees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the Tattiana of times fled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He conversation would have led⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But could not. Then she questioned him:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Had he been long here, and where from?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Straight from their province had he come?”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cast upwards then her eyeballs dim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto her husband, went away⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transfixed Onegin mine doth stay.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-20" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Is this the same Tattiana, say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before whom once in solitude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the beginning of this lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deep in the distant province rude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impelled by zeal for moral worth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He salutary rules poured forth?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The maid whose note he still possessed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein the heart its vows expressed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where all upon the surface lies⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That girl⁠—but he must dreaming be⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That girl whom once on a time he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could in a humble sphere despise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can she have been a moment gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus haughty, careless in her tone?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-21" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>He quits the fashionable throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And meditative homeward goes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Visions, now sad, now grateful, long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do agitate his late repose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wakes⁠—they with a letter come⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Princess <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> will be at home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On such a day. O Heavens, ’tis she!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! I accept. And instantly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He a polite reply doth scrawl.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What hath he dreamed? What hath occurred?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the recesses what hath stirred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a heart cold and cynical?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vexation? Vanity? or strove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again the plague of boyhood⁠—love?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-22" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The hours once more Onegin counts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impatient waits the close of day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ten strikes and his sledge he mounts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gallops to her house away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trembling he seeks the young princess⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana finds in loneliness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Together moments one or two</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They sat, but conversation’s flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deserted Eugene. He, distraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sits by her gloomily, desponds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarce to her questions he responds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full of exasperating thought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He fixedly upon her stares⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She calm and unconcerned appears.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-23" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The husband comes and interferes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With this unpleasant tête-à-tête,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Eugene pranks of former years</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And jests doth recapitulate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They talked and laughed. The guests arrived.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The conversation was revived</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the coarse wit of worldly hate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But round the hostess scintillate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Light sallies without coxcombry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awhile sound conversation seems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To banish far unworthy themes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And platitudes and pedantry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never was the ear affright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By liberties or loose or light.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-24" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And yet the city’s flower was there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Noblesse and models of the mode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faces which we meet everywhere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And necessary fools allowed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold the dames who once were fine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With roses, caps and looks malign;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some marriageable maids behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blank, unapproachable and cold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, the ambassador who speaks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Economy political,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with gray hair ambrosial</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The old man who has had his freaks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Renowned for his acumen, wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now ridiculous a bit.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-25" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Behold Sabouroff, whom the age</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For baseness of the spirit scorns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saint Priest, who every album’s page</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With blunted pencil-point adorns.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another tribune of the ball</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hung like a print against the wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pink as Palm Sunday cherubim,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-97" id="noteref-97" epub:type="noteref">97</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Motionless, mute, tight-laced and trim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The traveller, bird of passage he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stiff, overstarched and insolent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awakens secret merriment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By his embarrassed dignity⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mute glances interchanged aside</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meet punishment for him provide.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-26" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But my Onegin the whole eve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within his mind Tattiana bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not the young timid maid, believe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enamoured, simple-minded, poor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the indifferent princess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Divinity without access</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the imperial Neva’s shore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Men, how very like ye are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Eve the universal mother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Possession hath no power to please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The serpent to unlawful trees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye bids ye in some way or other⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless forbidden fruit we eat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our paradise is no more sweet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-27" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Ah! how Tattiana was transformed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How thoroughly her part she took!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How soon to habits she conformed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which crushing dignity must brook!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who would the maiden innocent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the unmoved, magnificent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Autocrat of the drawing-room seek?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he had made her heart beat quick!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas he whom, amid nightly shades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst Morpheus his approach delays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She mourned and to the moon would raise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The languid eye of love-sick maids,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dreaming perchance in weal or woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To end with him her path below.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-28" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>To Love all ages lowly bend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the young unpolluted heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His gusts should fertilize, amend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As vernal storms the fields athwart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Youth freshens beneath Passion’s showers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Develops and matures its powers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus in season the rich field</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gay flowers and luscious fruit doth yield.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But at a later, sterile age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The solstice of our earthly years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mournful Love’s deadly trace appears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As storms which in chill autumn rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And leave a marsh the fertile ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And devastate the woods around.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-29" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>There was no doubt! Eugene, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana loved as when a lad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both day and night he now must pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In love-lorn meditation sad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Careless of every social rule,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The crystals of her vestibule</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He daily in his drives drew near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like a shadow haunted her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enraptured was he if allowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To swathe her shoulders in the furs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If his hot hand encountered hers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or he dispersed the motley crowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of lackeys in her pathway grouped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or to pick up her kerchief stooped.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-30" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>She seemed of him oblivious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Despite the anguish of his breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Received him freely at her house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At times three words to him addressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In company, or simply bowed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or recognized not in the crowd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No coquetry was there, I vouch⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Society endures not such!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin’s cheek grew ashy pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Either she saw not or ignored;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin wasted; on my word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already he grew phthisical.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All to the doctors Eugene send,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they the waters recommend.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-31" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>He went not⁠—sooner was prepared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To write his forefathers to warn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his approach; but nothing cared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana⁠—thus the sex is born.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He obstinately will remain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still hopes, endeavours, though in vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sickness more courage doth command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than health, so with a trembling hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A love epistle he doth scrawl.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though correspondence as a rule</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He used to hate⁠—and was no fool⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet suffering emotional</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had rendered him an invalid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But word for word his letter read.</span>
				</p>
				<section id="canto-8-31-letter" epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Onegin’s Letter to Tattiana</h4>
					<p>
						<span>All is foreseen. My secret drear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will sound an insult in your ear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What acrimonious scorn I trace</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Depicted on your haughty face!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What do I ask? What cause assigned</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I to you reveal my mind?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To what malicious merriment,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It may be, I yield nutriment!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Meeting you in times past by chance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Warmth I imagined in your glance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, knowing not the actual truth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Restrained the impulses of youth;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Also my wretched liberty</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I would not part with finally;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This separated us as well⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lenski, unhappy victim, fell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From everything the heart held dear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I then resolved my heart to tear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unknown to all, without a tie,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I thought⁠—retirement, liberty,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will happiness replace. My God!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How I have erred and felt the rod!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>No, ever to behold your face,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To follow you in every place,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your smiling lips, your beaming eyes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To watch with lovers’ ecstasies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Long listen, comprehend the whole</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of your perfections in my soul,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before you agonized to die⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This, this were true felicity!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But such is not for me. I brood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Daily of love in solitude.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My days of life approach their end,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet I in idleness expend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The remnant destiny concedes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thus each stubbornly proceeds.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I feel, allotted is my span;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, that life longer may remain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At morn I must assuredly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Know that thy face that day I see.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>I tremble lest my humble prayer</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You with stern countenance declare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The artifice of villany⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I hear your harsh, reproachful cry.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If ye but knew how dreadful ’tis</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To bear love’s parching agonies⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To burn, yet reason keep awake</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The fever of the blood to slake⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A passionate desire to bend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, sobbing at your feet, to blend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Entreaties, woes and prayers, confess</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All that the heart would fain express⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet with a feigned frigidity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To arm the tongue and e’en the eye,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be in conversation clear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And happy unto you appear.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So be it! But internal strife</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I cannot longer wage concealed.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The die is cast! Thine is my life!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into thy hands my fate I yield!</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-32" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>No answer! He another sent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Epistle second, note the third,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remained unnoticed. Once he went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To an assembly⁠—she appeared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just as he entered. How severe!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She will not see, she will not hear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! she is as hard, behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And frosty as a Twelfth Night cold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, how her lips compressed restrain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The indignation of her heart!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sidelong look doth Eugene dart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where, where, remorse, compassion, pain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where, where, the trace of tears? None, none!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon her brow sits wrath alone⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-33" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And it may be a secret dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest the world or her lord divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A certain little escapade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well known unto Onegin mine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis hopeless! Homeward doth he flee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cursing his own stupidity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brooding o’er the ills he bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Society renounced once more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then in the silent cabinet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He in imagination saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The time when Melancholy’s claw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mid worldly pleasures chased him yet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Caught him and by the collar took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shut him in a lonely nook.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-34" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>He read as vainly as before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perusing Gibbon and Rousseau,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Manzoni, Herder and Chamfort,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-98" id="noteref-98" epub:type="noteref">98</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Madame de Stael, Bichat, Tissot:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He read the unbelieving Bayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Also the works of Fontenelle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some Russian authors he perused⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nought in the universe refused:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor almanacs nor newspapers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which lessons unto us repeat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein I castigation get;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where a madrigal occurs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Writ in my honour now and then⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i xml:lang="la">E sempre bene</i>, gentlemen!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-35" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But what results? His eyes peruse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thoughts meander far away⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ideas, desires and woes confuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His intellect in close array.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eyes, the printed lines betwixt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On lines invisible are fixt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas these he read and these alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His spirit was intent upon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They were the wonderful traditions</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of kindly, dim antiquity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dreams with no continuity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prophecies, threats and apparitions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lively trash of stories long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or letters of a maiden young.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-36" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And by degrees upon him grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lethargy of sense, a trance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soon imagination threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before him her wild game of chance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now upon the snow in thaw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A young man motionless he saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As one who bivouacs afield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heard a voice cry⁠—<em>Why! He’s killed!</em>⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now he views forgotten foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poltroons and men of slanderous tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bevies of treacherous maidens young;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thankless friends the circle rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mansion⁠—by the window, see!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sits alone⁠—’tis ever <em>she</em>!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-37" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>So frequently his mind would stray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He well-nigh lost the use of sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Almost became a poet say⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! what had been his eminence!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indeed, by force of magnetism</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Russian poem’s mechanism</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My scholar without aptitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At this time almost understood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How like a poet was my chum</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, sitting by his fire alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst cheerily the embers shone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He “<i xml:lang="it">Benedetta</i>” used to hum,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or “<i xml:lang="it">Idol mio</i>,” and in the grate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would lose his slippers or gazette.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-38" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Time flies! a genial air abroad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Winter resigned her empire white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin ne’er as poet showed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor died nor lost his senses quite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spring cheered him up, and he resigned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His chambers close wherein confined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He marmot-like did hibernate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His double sashes and his grate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sallied forth one brilliant morn⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the Neva’s bank he sleighs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the blue blocks of ice the rays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the sun glisten; muddy, worn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The snow upon the streets doth melt⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whither along them doth he pelt?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-39" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Onegin whither gallops? Ye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have guessed already. Yes, quite so!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto his own Tattiana he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Incorrigible rogue, doth go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her house he enters, ghastly white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The vestibule finds empty quite⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He enters the saloon. ’Tis blank!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A door he opens. But why shrank</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He back as from a sudden blow?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone the princess sitteth there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pallid and with dishevelled hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gazing upon a note below.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her tears flow plentifully and</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her cheek reclines upon her hand.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-40" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Oh! who her speechless agonies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could not in that brief moment guess!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who now could fail to recognize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana in the young princess!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tortured by pangs of wild regret,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eugene fell prostrate at her feet⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She starts, nor doth a word express,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But gazes on Onegin’s face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without amaze or wrath displayed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sunken eye and aspect faint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imploring looks and mute complaint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She comprehends. The simple maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By fond illusions once possest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is once again made manifest.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-41" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>His kneeling posture he retains⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Calmly her eyes encounter his⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Insensible her hand remains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath his lips’ devouring kiss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What visions then her fancy thronged⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A breathless silence then, prolonged⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But finally she softly said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Enough, arise! for much we need</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without disguise ourselves explain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin, hast forgotten yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hour when⁠—Fate so willed⁠—we met</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the lone garden and the lane?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How meekly then I heard you preach⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-day it is my turn to teach.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-42" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Onegin, I was younger then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And better, if I judge aright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I loved you⁠—what did I obtain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Affection how did you requite?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with austerity!⁠—for you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No novelty⁠—is it not true?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was the meek love a maiden feels.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now⁠—my very blood congeals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Calling to mind your icy look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sermon⁠—but in that dread hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I blame not your behaviour⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An honourable course ye took,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Displayed a noble rectitude⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul is filled with gratitude!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-43" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Then, in the country, is’t not true?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And far removed from rumour vain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I did not please you. Why pursue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me now, inflict upon me pain?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore am I your quarry held?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is it that I am now compelled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To move in fashionable life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I am rich, a prince’s wife?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because my lord, in battles maimed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is petted by the Emperor?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That my dishonour would ensure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A notoriety proclaimed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in society might shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bastard fame prohibited?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-44" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“I weep. And if within your breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My image hath not disappeared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Know that your sarcasm ill-suppressed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your conversation cold and hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If the choice in my power were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lawless love I should prefer⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to these letters and these tears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For visions of my childish years</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then ye were barely generous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Age immature averse to cheat⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now⁠—what brings you to my feet?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How mean, how pusillanimous!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A prudent man like you and brave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shallow sentiment a slave!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-45" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Onegin, all this sumptuousness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gilding of life’s vanities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the world’s vortex my success,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My splendid house and gaieties⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What are they? Gladly would I yield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This life in masquerade concealed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This glitter, riot, emptiness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For my wild garden and bookcase⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes! for our unpretending home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin⁠—the beloved place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the first time I saw your face⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or for the solitary tomb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein my poor old nurse doth lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath a cross and shrubbery.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-46" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“ ’Twas possible then, happiness⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay, near⁠—but destiny decreed⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My lot is fixed⁠—with thoughtlessness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It may be that I did proceed⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With bitter tears my mother prayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for Tattiana, mournful maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indifferent was her future fate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I married⁠—now, I supplicate⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ever your Tattiana leave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your heart possesses, I know well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Honour and pride inflexible.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I love you⁠—to what end deceive?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I am now another’s bride⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ever faithful will abide.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-47" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>She rose⁠—departed. But Eugene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood as if struck by lightning fire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What a storm of emotions keen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Raged round him and of balked desire!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hark! the clank of spurs is heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Tania’s husband soon appeared.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now our hero we must leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just at a moment which I grieve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must be pronounced unfortunate⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For long⁠—for ever. To be sure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Together we have wandered o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The world enough. Congratulate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each other as the shore we climb!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hurrah! it long ago was time!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-48" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Reader, whoever thou mayst be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foeman or friend, I do aspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To part in amity with thee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adieu! whate’er thou didst desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From careless stanzas such as these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of passion reminiscences,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pictures of the amusing scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Repose from labour, satire keen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or faults of grammar on its page⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God grant that all who herein glance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In serious mood or dalliance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in a squabble to engage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May find a crumb to satisfy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now we must separate. Good-bye!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-49" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And farewell thou, my gloomy friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou also, my ideal true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou, persistent to the end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My little book. With thee I knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that a poet could desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oblivion of life’s tempest dire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of friends the grateful intercourse⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, many a year hath run its course</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since I beheld Eugene and young</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana in a misty dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my romance’s open theme</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glittered in a perspective long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I discerned through Fancy’s prism</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Distinctly not its mechanism.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-8-50" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But ye to whom, when friendship heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first-fruits of my tale I read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Saadi anciently averred⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-99" id="noteref-99" epub:type="noteref">99</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some are afar and some are dead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without them Eugene is complete;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou, from whom Tattiana sweet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was drawn, ideal of my lay⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! what hath fate not torn away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Happy who quit life’s banquet seat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the dregs they shall divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the cup brimming o’er with wine⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who the romance do not complete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But who abandon it⁠—as I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have my Onegin⁠—suddenly.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
