<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto the Seventh: Moscow</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal">the Seventh</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Moscow<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-78" id="noteref-78" epub:type="noteref">78</a></p>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Moscow, Russia’s darling daughter,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where thine equal shall we find?</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Dmitrieff</cite>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Who can help loving mother Moscow?</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Baratynski (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Feasts</i>)</cite>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>A journey to Moscow! To see the world!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where better?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i3">Where man is not.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Griboyédoff (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Woe from Wit</i>)</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<section id="canto-7-1" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Impelled by Spring’s dissolving beams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The snows from off the hills around</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Descended swift in turbid streams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And flooded all the level ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A smile from slumbering nature clear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did seem to greet the youthful year;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heavens shone in deeper blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The woods, still naked to the view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seemed in a haze of green embowered.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bee forth from his cell of wax</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flew to collect his rural tax;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The valleys dried and gaily flowered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Herds low, and under night’s dark veil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already sings the nightingale.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-2" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Mournful is thine approach to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Spring, thou chosen time of love!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What agitation languidly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My spirit and my blood doth move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What sad emotions o’er me steal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When first upon my cheek I feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The breath of Spring again renewed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Secure in rural quietude⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, strange to me is happiness?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do all things which to mirth incline.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make a dark existence shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inflict annoyance and distress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a soul inert and cloyed?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And is all light within destroyed?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-3" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Or, heedless of the leaves’ return</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Autumn late to earth consigned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do we alone our losses mourn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which the rustling woods remind?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, when anew all Nature teems,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do we foresee in troubled dreams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The coming of life’s Autumn drear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which no springtime shall appear?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, it may be, we inly seek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wafted upon poetic wing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some other long-departed Spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose memories make the heart beat quick</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thoughts of a far distant land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a strange night when the moon and⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-4" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis now the season! Idlers all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Epicurean philosophers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye men of fashion cynical,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Levshin’s school ye followers,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-79" id="noteref-79" epub:type="noteref">79</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Priams of country populations</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dames of fine organisations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spring summons you to her green bowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis the warm time of labour, flowers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The time for mystic strolls which late</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the starry night extend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quick to the country let us wend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vehicles surcharged with freight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In coach or post-cart duly placed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond the city-barriers haste.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-5" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thou also, reader generous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The chaise long ordered please employ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abandon cities riotous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in the winter were a joy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Muse capricious let us coax,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go hear the rustling of the oaks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside a nameless rivulet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where in the country Eugene yet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An idle anchorite and sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A while ago the winter spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Near young Tattiana resident,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My pretty self-deceiving maid⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more the village knows his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For there he left a mournful trace.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-6" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Let us proceed unto a rill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in a hilly neighbourhood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeks, winding amid meadows still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The river through the linden wood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nightingale there all night long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spring’s paramour, pours forth her song</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fountain brawls, sweetbriers bloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo! where lies a marble tomb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And two old pines their branches spread⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<i>Vladimir Lenski lies beneath,</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Who early died a gallant death</i>,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereon the passing traveller read:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<i>The date, his fleeting years how long⁠—</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Repose in peace, thou child of song</i>.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-7" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Time was, the breath of early dawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would agitate a mystic wreath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hung on a pine branch earthward drawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above the humble urn of death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time was, two maidens from their home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At eventide would hither come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, by the light the moonbeams gave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lament, embrace upon that grave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now⁠—none heeds the monument</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of woe: effaced the pathway now:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no wreath upon the bough:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone beside it, gray and bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As formerly the shepherd sits</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his poor basten sandal knits.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-8" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>My poor Vladimir, bitter tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee but a little space bewept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faithless, alas! thy maid appears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor true unto her sorrow kept.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another could her heart engage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another could her woe assuage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By flattery and lover’s art⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lancer captivates her heart!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lancer her soul dotes upon:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the altar, lo! the pair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mark ye with what a modest air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She bows her head beneath the crown;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-80" id="noteref-80" epub:type="noteref">80</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold her downcast eyes which glow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her lips where light smiles come and go!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-9" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>My poor Vladimir! In the tomb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Passed into dull eternity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was the sad poet filled with gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hearing the fatal perfidy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, beyond Lethe lulled to rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath the bard, by indifference blest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Callous to all on earth become⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is the world to him sealed and dumb?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same unmoved oblivion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On us beyond the grave attends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The voice of lovers, foes and friends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dies suddenly: of heirs alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remains on earth the unseemly rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst struggling for the heritage.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-10" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Soon Olga’s accents shrill resound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No longer through her former home;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lancer, to his calling bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back to his regiment must roam.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The aged mother, bathed in tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Distracted by her grief appears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the hour came to bid good-bye⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But my Tattiana’s eyes were dry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only her countenance assumed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A deadly pallor, air distressed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When all around the entrance pressed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To say farewell, and fussed and fumed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around the carriage of the pair⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana gently led them there.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-11" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And long her eyes as through a haze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the wedded couple strain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! the friend of childish days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away, Tattiana, hath been ta’en.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy dove, thy darling little pet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On whom a sister’s heart was set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Afar is borne by cruel fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For evermore is separate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She wanders aimless as a sprite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the tangled garden goes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But nowhere can she find repose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor even tears afford respite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of consolation all bereft⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well nigh her heart in twain was cleft.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-12" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>In cruel solitude each day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With flame more ardent passion burns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to Onegin far away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her heart importunately turns.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She never more his face may view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For was it not her duty to</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Detest him for a brother slain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The poet fell; already men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more remembered him; unto</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another his betrothed was given;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The memory of the bard was driven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like smoke athwart the heaven blue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two hearts perchance were desolate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mourned him still. Why mourn his fate?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-13" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>’Twas eve. ’Twas dusk. The river speeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In tranquil flow. The beetle hums.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already dance to song proceeds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fisher’s fire afar illumes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The river’s bank. Tattiana lone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the silver of the moon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long time in meditation deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her path across the plain doth keep⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proceeds, until she from a hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sees where a noble mansion stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A village and beneath, a wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A garden by a shining rill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She gazed thereon, and instant beat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her heart more loudly and more fleet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-14" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>She hesitates, in doubt is thrown⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Shall I proceed, or homeward flee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is not there: I am not known:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The house and garden I would see.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana from the hill descends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With bated breath, around she bends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A countenance perplexed and scared.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She enters a deserted yard⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yelping, a pack of dogs rush out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But at her shriek ran forth with noise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The household troop of little boys,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who with a scuffle and a shout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The curs away to kennel chase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The damsel under escort place.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-15" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Can I inspect the mansion, please?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana asks, and hurriedly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto Anicia for the keys</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The family of children hie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anicia soon appears, the door</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Opens unto her visitor.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the lonely house she went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein a space Onegin spent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She gazed⁠—a cue, forgotten long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth on the billiard table rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the tumbled sofa placed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A riding whip. She strolls along.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The beldam saith: “The hearth, by it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The master always used to sit.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-16" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Departed Lenski here to dine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In winter time would often come.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Please follow this way, lady mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is my master’s sitting-room.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis here he slept, his coffee took,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into accounts would sometimes look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A book at early morn perused.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The room my former master used.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Sundays by yon window he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spectacles upon nose, all day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was wont with me at cards to play.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God save his soul eternally</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grant his weary bones their rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deep in our mother Earth’s chill breast!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-17" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Tattiana’s eyes with tender gleam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On everything around her gaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of priceless value all things seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in her languid bosom raise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pleasure though with sorrow knit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The table with its lamp unlit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pile of books, with carpet spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the window-sill his bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The landscape which the moonbeams fret,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The twilight pale which softens all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lord Byron’s portrait on the wall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the cast-iron statuette</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With folded arms and eyes bent low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cocked hat and melancholy brow.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-81" id="noteref-81" epub:type="noteref">81</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-18" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Long in this fashionable cell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana as enchanted stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But it grew late; cold blew the gale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dark was the valley and the wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slept o’er the river misty grown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behind the mountain sank the moon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long, long the hour had past when home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our youthful wanderer should roam.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She hid the trouble of her breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaved an involuntary sigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And turned to leave immediately,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But first permission did request</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thither in future to proceed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That certain volumes she might read.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-19" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Adieu she to the matron said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the front gates, but in brief space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At early morn returns the maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the abandoned dwelling-place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When in the study’s calm retreat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrapt in oblivion complete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She found herself alone at last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Longtime her tears flowed thick and fast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But presently she tried to read;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At first for books was disinclined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But soon their choice seemed to her mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remarkable. She then indeed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Devoured them with an eager zest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A new world was made manifest!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-20" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Although we know that Eugene had</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long ceased to be a reading man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still certain authors, I may add,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had excepted from the ban:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bard of Juan and the Giaour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With it may be a couple more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Romances three, in which ye scan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Portrayed contemporary man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the reflection of his age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His immorality of mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To arid selfishness resigned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A visionary personage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his exasperated sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His energy and impotence.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-21" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And numerous pages had preserved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sharp incisions of his nail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And these the attentive maid observed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With eye precise and without fail.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana saw with trepidation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By what idea or observation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin was the most impressed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In what he merely acquiesced.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon those margins she perceived</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin’s pencillings. His mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made revelations undesigned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of what he thought and what believed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dagger, asterisk, or note</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Interrogation to denote.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-22" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And my Tattiana now began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To understand by slow degrees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More clearly, God be praised, the man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom autocratic fate’s decrees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had bid her sigh for without hope⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dangerous, gloomy misanthrope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Being from hell or heaven sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Angel or fiend malevolent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is he? or an imitation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bogy conjured up in joke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Russian in Childe Harold’s cloak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of foreign whims the impersonation⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Handbook of fashionable phrase</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or parody of modern ways?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-23" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Hath she found out the riddle yet?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath she a fitting phrase selected?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But time flies and she doth forget</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They long at home have her expected⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whither two neighbouring dames have walked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a long time about her talked.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What can be done? She is no child!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cried the old dame with anguish filled:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Olinka is her junior, see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis time to marry her, ’tis true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But tell me what am I to do?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To all she answers cruelly⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will not wed, and ever weeps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lonely through the forest creeps.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-24" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Is she in love?” quoth one. “With whom?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bouyànoff courted. She refused.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pétòushkoff met the selfsame doom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hussar Pykhtin was accused.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How the young imp on Tania doted!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To captivate her how devoted!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I mused: perhaps the matter’s squared⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O yes! my hopes soon disappeared.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“But, <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">mátushka</i>, to Moscow you<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-82" id="noteref-82" epub:type="noteref">82</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should go, the market for a maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many a vacancy, ’tis said.”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Alas! my friend, no revenue!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Enough to see one winter’s end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If not, the money I will lend.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-25" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The venerable dame opined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The counsel good and full of reason,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her money counted, and designed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To visit Moscow in the season.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana learns the intelligence⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of her provincial innocence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The unaffected traits she now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto a carping world must show⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her toilette’s antiquated style,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her antiquated mode of speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Moscow fops and Circes each</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mark with a contemptuous smile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Horror! had she not better stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deep in the greenwood far away?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-26" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Arising with the morning’s light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the fields she makes her way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with emotional delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surveying them, she thus doth say:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ye peaceful valleys all, good-bye!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye well-known mountain summits high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye groves whose depths I know so well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou beauteous sky above, farewell!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delicious nature, thee I fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The calm existence which I prize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I yield for splendid vanities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou too farewell, my liberty!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whither and wherefore do I speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what will Destiny concede?”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-27" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Farther Tattiana’s walks extend⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis now the hillock now the rill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their natural attractions lend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stay the maid against her will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She the acquaintances she loves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her spacious fields and shady groves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another visit hastes to pay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Summer swiftly fades away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And golden Autumn draweth nigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pallid nature trembling grieves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A victim decked with golden leaves;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dark clouds before the north wind fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It blew: it howled: till winter e’en</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came forth in all her magic sheen.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-28" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The snow descends and buries all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hangs heavy on the oaken boughs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A white and undulating pall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er hillock and o’er meadow throws.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The channel of the river stilled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if with eider-down is filled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hoar-frost glitters: all rejoice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In mother Winter’s strange caprice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Tania’s heart is not at ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Winter’s approach she doth not hail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor the frost particles inhale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor the first snow of winter seize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her shoulders, breast and face to lave⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alarm the winter journey gave.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-29" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The date was fixed though oft postponed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ultimately doth approach.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Examined, mended, newly found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was the old and forgotten coach;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kibitkas three, the accustomed train,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-83" id="noteref-83" epub:type="noteref">83</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The household property contain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saucepans and mattresses and chairs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Portmanteaus and preserves in jars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feather-beds, also poultry-coops,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Basins and jugs⁠—well! everything</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To happiness contributing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold! beside their dwelling groups</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of serfs the farewell wail have given.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nags eighteen to the door are driven.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-30" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>These to the coach of state are bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Breakfast the busy cooks prepare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Baggage is heaped up in a mound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old women at the coachmen swear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bearded postillion astride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lean and shaggy nag doth ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the gates the servants fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bid the gentlefolk good-bye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These take their seats; the coach of state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leisurely through the gateway glides.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Adieu! thou home where peace abides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where turmoil cannot penetrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall I behold thee once again?”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana tears cannot restrain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-31" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The limits of enlightenment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When to enlarge we shall succeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In course of time (the whole extent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will not five centuries exceed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By computation) it is like</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our roads transformed the eye will strike;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Highways all Russia will unite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And form a network left and right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On iron bridges we shall gaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which o’er the waters boldly leap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mountains we’ll level and through deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Streams excavate subaqueous ways,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Christian folk will, I expect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An inn at every stage erect.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-32" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But now, what wretched roads one sees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our bridges long neglected rot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the stages bugs and fleas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One moment’s slumber suffer not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inns there are none. Pretentious but</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meagre, within a draughty hut,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bill of fare hangs full in sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And irritates the appetite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meantime a Cyclops of those parts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before a fire which feebly glows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mends with the Russian hammer’s blows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flimsy wares of Western marts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With blessings on the ditches and</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ruts of his own fatherland.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-33" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Yet on a frosty winter day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The journey in a sledge doth please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No senseless fashionable lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glides with a more luxurious ease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For our Automedons are fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And our swift troikas never tire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The verst posts catch the vacant eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like a palisade flit by.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-84" id="noteref-84" epub:type="noteref">84</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Làrinas unwisely went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From apprehension of the cost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By their own horses, not the post⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Tania to her heart’s content</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could taste the pleasures of the road.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seven days and nights the travellers plod.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-34" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But they draw near. Before them, lo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>White Moscow raises her old spires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose countless golden crosses glow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As with innumerable fires.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-85" id="noteref-85" epub:type="noteref">85</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! brethren, what was my delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I yon semicircle bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of churches, gardens, belfries high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Descried before me suddenly!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moscow, how oft in evil days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Condemned to exile dire by fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On thee I used to meditate!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moscow! How much is in the phrase</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For every loyal Russian breast!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How much is in that word expressed!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-35" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Lo! compassed by his grove of oaks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Petrovski Palace! Gloomily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His recent glory he invokes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here, drunk with his late victory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Napoleon tarried till it please</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moscow approach on bended knees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time-honoured Kremlin’s keys present.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not so! My Moscow never went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To seek him out with bended head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No gift she bears, no feast proclaims,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But lights incendiary flames</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the impatient chief instead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From hence engrossed in thought profound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He on the conflagration frowned.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-86" id="noteref-86" epub:type="noteref">86</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-36" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Adieu, thou witness of our glory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Petrovski Palace; come, astir!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drive on! the city barriers hoary</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appear; along the road of Tver</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The coach is borne o’er ruts and holes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past women, sentry-boxes, rolls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past palaces and nunneries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lamp-posts, shops, sledges, families,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bokharians, peasants, beds of greens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Boulevards, belfries, milliners,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Huts, chemists, Cossacks, shopkeepers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fashionable magazines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Balconies, lion’s heads on doors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jackdaws on every spire⁠—in scores.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-87" id="noteref-87" epub:type="noteref">87</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-37" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The weary way still incomplete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An hour passed by⁠—another⁠—till,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Near Khariton’s in a side street</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The coach before a house stood still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At an old aunt’s they had arrived</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who had for four long years survived</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An invalid from lung complaint.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Kalmuck gray, in caftan rent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spectacles, his knitting staid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the saloon threw open wide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The princess from the sofa cried</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the newcomers welcome bade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The two old ladies then embraced</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And exclamations interlaced.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-38" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="fr">Princesse, mon ange!</i>”⁠—“Pachette!”⁠—“Aline!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Who would have thought it? As of yore!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is it for long?”⁠—“<i xml:lang="fr">Ma chère cousine!</i>”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Sit down. How funny, to be sure!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis a scene of romance, I vow!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Tania, my eldest child, you know”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ah! come, Tattiana, come to me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is it a dream, and can it be?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cousin, rememb’rest Grandison?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What! Grandison?”⁠—“Yes, certainly!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Oh! I remember, where is he?”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Here, he resides with Simeon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He called upon me Christmas Eve⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His son is married, just conceive!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-39" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“And he⁠—but of him presently⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-morrow Tania we will show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What say you? to the family⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! abroad I cannot go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See, I can hardly crawl about⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But you must both be quite tired out!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us go seek a little rest⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! I’m so weak⁠—my throbbing breast!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oppressive now is happiness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not only sorrow⁠—Ah! my dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now I am fit for nothing here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In old age life is weariness!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then weeping she sank back distressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fits of coughing racked her chest.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-40" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</h3>
				<p>
					<span>By the sick lady’s gaiety</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kindness Tania was impressed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, her own room in memory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The strange apartment her oppressed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Repose her silken curtains fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She could not sleep in her new bed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The early tinkling of the bells</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which of approaching labour tells</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aroused Tattiana from her bed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The maiden at her casement sits</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As daylight glimmers, darkness flits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ah! discerns nor wood nor mead⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath her lay a strange courtyard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A stable, kitchen, fence appeared.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-41" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>To consanguineous dinners they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conduct Tattiana constantly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That grandmothers and grandsires may</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Contemplate her sad reverie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We Russians, friends from distant parts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever receive with kindly hearts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And exclamations and good cheer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“How Tania grows! Doth it appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long since I held thee at the font⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since in these arms I thee did bear⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And since I pulled thee by the ear⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I to give thee cakes was wont?”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then the old dames in chorus sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Oh! how our years are vanishing!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-42" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But nothing changed in them is seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All in the good old style appears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our dear old aunt, Princess Helène,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her cap of tulle still ever wears:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Luceria Lvovna paint applies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amy Petrovna utters lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ivan Petròvitch still a gaby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Simeon Petròvitch just as shabby;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pélagie Nikolavna has</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her friend Monsieur Finemouche the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her wolf-dog and her husband tame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still of his club he member was⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As deaf and silly doth remain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still eats and drinks enough for twain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-43" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Their daughters kiss Tattiana fair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the beginning, cold and mute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moscow’s young Graces at her stare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Examine her from head to foot.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They deem her somewhat finical,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outlandish and provincial,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A trifle pale, a trifle lean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But plainer girls they oft had seen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Obedient then to Nature’s law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With her they did associate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Squeeze tiny hands and osculate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her tresses curled in fashion saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And oft in whispers would impart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A maiden’s secrets⁠—of the heart.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-44" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Triumphs⁠—their own or those of friends⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hopes, frolics, dreams and sentiment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their harmless conversation blends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With scandal’s trivial ornament.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to reward such confidence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her amorous experience</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With mute appeal to ask they seem⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Tania just as in a dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without participation hears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their voices nought to her impart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the lone secret of her heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her sacred hoard of joy and tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She buries deep within her breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor aught confides unto the rest.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-45" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Tattiana would have gladly heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The converse of the world polite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in the drawing-room all appeared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find in gossip such delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speech was so tame and colourless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their slander e’en was weariness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In their sterility of prattle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Questions and news and tittle-tattle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sense was ever manifest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though by an error and unsought⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The languid mind could smile at nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heart would not throb albeit in jest⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even amusing fools we miss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thee, thou world of empty bliss.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-46" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>In groups, official striplings glance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conceitedly on Tania fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And views amongst themselves advance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unfavourable unto her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But one buffoon unhappy deemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her the ideal which he dreamed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And leaning ’gainst the portal closed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To her an elegy composed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Also one Viázemski, remarking</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana by a poor aunt’s side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Successfully to please her tried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And an old gent the poet marking</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Tania, smoothing his peruke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ask her name the trouble took.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-88" id="noteref-88" epub:type="noteref">88</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-47" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But where Melpomene doth rave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With lengthened howl and accent loud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her bespangled robe doth wave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before a cold indifferent crowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where Thalia softly dreams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heedless of approval seems,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Terpsichore alone among</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her sisterhood delights the young</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(So ’twas with us in former years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In your young days and also mine),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never upon my heroine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The jealous dame her lorgnette veers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The connoisseur his glances throws</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From boxes or from stalls in rows.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-48" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>To the assembly her they bear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There the confusion, pressure, heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The crash of music, candles’ glare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rapid whirl of many feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ladies’ dresses airy, light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The motley moving mass and bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young ladies in a vasty curve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To strike imagination serve.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis there that arrant fops display</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their insolence and waistcoats white</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And glasses unemployed all night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thither hussars on leave will stray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To clank the spur, delight the fair⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And vanish like a bird in air.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-49" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Full many a lovely star hath night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Moscow many a beauty fair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet clearer shines than every light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The moon in the blue atmosphere.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she to whom my lyre would fain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet dares not, dedicate its strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shines in the female firmament</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a full moon magnificent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! with what pride celestial</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her feet the earth beneath her press!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her heart how full of gentleness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her glance how wild yet genial!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enough, enough, conclude thy lay⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For folly’s dues thou hadst to pay.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-50" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Noise, laughter, bowing, hurrying mixt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gallop, mazurka, waltzing⁠—see!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pillar by, two aunts betwixt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tania, observed by nobody,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Looks upon all with absent gaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hates the world’s discordant ways.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis noisome to her there: in thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again her rural life she sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hamlet, the poor villagers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The little solitary nook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where shining runs the tiny brook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her garden, and those books of hers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the lime alley’s twilight dim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the first time she met with <em>him</em>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-51" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thus widely meditation erred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgot the world, the noisy ball,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst from her countenance ne’er stirred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The eyes of a grave general.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both aunts looked knowing as a judge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each gave Tattiana’s arm a nudge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in a whisper did repeat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Look quickly to your left, my sweet!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The left? Why, what on earth is there?”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“No matter, look immediately.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, in that knot of company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two dressed in uniform appear⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! he has gone the other way”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Who? Is it that stout general, pray?”⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-7-52" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Let us congratulations pay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To our Tattiana conquering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for a time our course delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I forget not whom I sing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me explain that in my song</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I celebrate a comrade young</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the extent of his caprice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O epic Muse, my powers increase</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grant success to labour long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Having a trusty staff bestowed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grant that I err not on the road.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enough! my pack is now unslung⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To classicism I’ve homage paid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though late, have a beginning made.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-89" id="noteref-89" epub:type="noteref">89</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
