<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto the Sixth: The Duel</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal">the Sixth</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">The Duel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-71" id="noteref-71" epub:type="noteref">71</a></p>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
					<p xml:lang="it">
						<span>“La, sotto giorni nubilosi e brevi,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nasce una gente a cui ’l morir non duole.”</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Petrarch</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<section id="canto-6-1" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Having remarked Vladimir’s flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin, bored to death again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Olga stood, dejected quite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And satisfied with vengeance ta’en.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Olga began to long likewise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Lenski, sought him with her eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And endless the cotillon seemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if some troubled dream she dreamed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis done. To supper they proceed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bedding is laid out and to all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assigned a lodging, from the hall<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-72" id="noteref-72" epub:type="noteref">72</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up to the attic, and all need</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tranquil repose. Eugene alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pass the night at home hath gone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-2" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>All slumber. In the drawing-room</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loud snores the cumbrous Poustiakoff</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With better half as cumbersome;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gvozdine, Bouyànoff, Pétòushkoff</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Fliànoff, somewhat indisposed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On chairs in the saloon reposed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst on the floor Monsieur Triquet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In jersey and in nightcap lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Olga’s and Tattiana’s rooms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay all the girls by sleep embraced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Except one by the window placed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom pale Diana’s ray illumes⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My poor Tattiana cannot sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But stares into the darkness deep.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-3" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>His visit she had not awaited,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His momentary loving glance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her inmost soul had penetrated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his strange conduct at the dance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Olga; nor of this appeared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An explanation: she was scared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alarmed by jealous agonies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hand of ice appeared to seize<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-73" id="noteref-73" epub:type="noteref">73</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her heart: it seemed a darksome pit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath her roaring opened wide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I shall expire,” Tattiana cried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“But death from him will be delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I murmur not! Why mournfulness?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He <em>cannot</em> give me happiness.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-4" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Haste, haste thy lagging pace, my story!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A new acquaintance we must scan.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There dwells five versts from Krasnogory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vladimir’s property, a man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who thrives this moment as I write,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A philosophic anchorite:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Zaretski, once a bully bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gambling troop when he controlled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chief rascal, pot-house president,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now of a family the head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Simple and kindly and unwed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>True friend, landlord benevolent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea! and a man of honour, lo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How perfect doth our epoch grow!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-5" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Time was the flattering voice of fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His ruffian bravery adored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And true, his pistol’s faultless aim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An ace at fifteen paces bored.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I must add to what I write</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, tipsy once in actual fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He from his Kalmuck horse did leap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In mud and mire to wallow deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drunk as a fly; and thus the French</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A valuable hostage gained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A modern Regulus unchained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who to surrender did not blench</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That every morn at Verrey’s cost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three flasks of wine he might exhaust.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-6" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Time was, his raillery was gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He loved the simpleton to mock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make wise men the idiot play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Openly or ’neath decent cloak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet sometimes this or that deceit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Encountered punishment complete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sometimes into snares as well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himself just like a greenhorn fell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He could in disputation shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With pungent or obtuse retort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At times to silence would resort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At times talk nonsense with design;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quarrels among young friends he bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the field of honour led;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-7" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Or reconciled them, it may be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the three to breakfast went;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he’d malign them secretly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With jest and gossip gaily blent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i xml:lang="la">Sed alia tempora</i>. And bravery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Like love, another sort of knavery!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Diminishes as years decline.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, as I said, Zaretski mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath acacias, cherry-trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From storms protection having sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lived as a really wise man ought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Horace, planted cabbages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both ducks and geese in plenty bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lessons to his children read.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-8" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>He was no fool, and Eugene mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To friendship making no pretence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Admired his judgment, which was fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pervaded with much common sense.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He usually was glad to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The man and liked his company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, when he came next day to call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was not surprised thereby at all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, after mutual compliments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Zaretski with a knowing grin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere conversation could begin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The epistle from the bard presents.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin to the window went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scanned in silence its content.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-9" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>It was a cheery, generous</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cartel, or challenge to a fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereto in language courteous</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lenski his comrade did invite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin, by first impulse moved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turned and replied as it behoved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Curtly announcing for the fray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he was “ready any day.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Zaretski rose, nor would explain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He cared no longer there to stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had much to do at home that day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so departed. But Eugene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The matter by his conscience tried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was with himself dissatisfied.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-10" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
				<p>
					<span>In fact, the subject analysed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within that secret court discussed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In much his conduct stigmatized;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, from the outset, ’twas unjust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To jest as he had done last eve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A timid, shrinking love to grieve.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ought he not to disregard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The poet’s madness? for ’tis hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At eighteen not to play the fool!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sincerely loving him, Eugene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assuredly should not have been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conventionality’s dull tool⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not a mere hot, pugnacious boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But man of sense and probity.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-11" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>He might his motives have narrated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not bristled up like a wild beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He ought to have conciliated</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That youthful heart⁠—“But, now at least,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The opportunity is flown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides, a duellist well-known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath mixed himself in the affair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Malicious and a slanderer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Undoubtedly, disdain alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should recompense his idle jeers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But fools⁠—their calumnies and sneers”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold! the world’s opinion!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-74" id="noteref-74" epub:type="noteref">74</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our idol, Honour’s motive force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round which revolves the universe.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-12" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Impatient, boiling o’er with wrath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bard his answer waits at home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But lo! his braggart neighbour hath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Triumphant with the answer come.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now for the jealous youth what joy!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He feared the criminal might try</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To treat the matter as a jest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Use subterfuge, and thus his breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the dread pistol turn away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now all doubt was set aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the windmill he must ride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-morrow before break of day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cock the pistol; barrel bend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On thigh or temple, friend on friend.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-13" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Resolved the flirt to cast away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The foaming Lenski would refuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see his Olga ere the fray⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His watch, the sun in turn he views⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Finally tost his arms in air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo! he is already there!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He deemed his coming would inspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Olga with trepidation dire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was deceived. Just as before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The miserable bard to meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As hope uncertain and as sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Olga ran skipping from the door.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was as heedless and as gay⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well! just as she was yesterday.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-14" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Why did you leave last night so soon?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was the first question Olga made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lenski, into confusion thrown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All silently hung down his head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jealousy and vexation took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To flight before her radiant look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before such fond simplicity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mental elasticity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He eyed her with a fond concern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perceived that he was still beloved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already by repentance moved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ask forgiveness seemed to yearn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But trembles, words he cannot find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delighted, almost sane in mind.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-15" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But once more pensive and distressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside his Olga doth he grieve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor enough strength of mind possessed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mention the foregoing eve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He mused: “I will her saviour be!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With ardent sighs and flattery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The vile seducer shall not dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The freshness of her heart impair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor shall the caterpillar come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lily’s stem to eat away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor shall the bud of yesterday</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perish when half disclosed its bloom!”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All this, my friends, translate aright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I with my friend intend to fight!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-16" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>If he had only known the wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which rankled in Tattiana’s breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if Tattiana mine had found⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If the poor maiden could have guessed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the two friends with morning’s light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above the yawning grave would fight⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! it may be, affection true</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had reconciled the pair anew!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of this love, e’en casually,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As yet none had discovered aught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eugene of course related nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana suffered secretly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her nurse, who could have made a guess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was famous for thick-headedness.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-17" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Lenski that eve in thought immersed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now gloomy seemed and cheerful now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he who by the Muse was nursed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is ever thus. With frowning brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the pianoforte he moves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And various chords upon it proves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, eyeing Olga, whispers low:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I’m happy, say, is it not so?”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But it grew late; he must not stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heavy his heart with anguish grew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the young girl he said adieu,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As it were, tore himself away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gazing into his face, she said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What ails thee?”⁠—“Nothing.”⁠—He is fled.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-18" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>At home arriving he addressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His care unto his pistols’ plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Replaced them in their box, undressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Schiller read by candlelight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But one thought only filled his mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His mournful heart no peace could find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Olga he sees before his eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Miraculously fair arise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vladimir closes up his book,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grasps a pen: his verse, albeit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With lovers’ rubbish filled, was neat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And flowed harmoniously. He took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spouted it with lyric fire⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like D⁠⸺ when dinner doth inspire.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-19" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Destiny hath preserved his lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have it. Lo! the very thing!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Oh! whither have ye winged your way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye golden days of my young spring?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What will the coming dawn reveal?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain my anxious eyes appeal;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In mist profound all yet is hid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So be it! Just the laws which bid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fatal bullet penetrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or innocently past me fly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good governs all! The hour draws nigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of life or death predestinate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blest be the labours of the light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And blest the shadows of the night.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-20" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“To-morrow’s dawn will glimmer gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bright day will then begin to burn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the dark sepulchre I may</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have entered never to return.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The memory of the bard, a dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will be absorbed by Lethe’s stream;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men will forget me, but my urn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To visit, lovely maid, return,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er my remains to drop a tear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And think: here lies who loved me well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For consecrate to me he fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the dawn of existence drear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Maid whom my heart desires alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Approach, approach; I am thine own.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-21" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thus in a style <em>obscure</em> and <em>stale</em>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-75" id="noteref-75" epub:type="noteref">75</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wrote (’tis the romantic style,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though of romance therein I fail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see aught⁠—never mind meanwhile)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And about dawn upon his breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His weary head declined at rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For o’er a word to fashion known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ideal,” he had drowsy grown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But scarce had sleep’s soft witchery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Subdued him, when his neighbour stept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the chamber where he slept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wakened him with the loud cry:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“ ’Tis time to get up! Seven doth strike.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin waits on us, ’tis like.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-22" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>He was in error; for Eugene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was sleeping then a sleep like death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pall of night was growing thin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Lucifer the cock must breathe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His song, when still he slumbered deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sun had mounted high his steep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A passing snowstorm wreathed away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With pallid light, but Eugene lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his couch insensibly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slumber still o’er him lingering flies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But finally he oped his eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And turned aside the drapery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He gazed upon the clock which showed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He long should have been on the road.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-23" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>He rings in haste; in haste arrives</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His Frenchman, good Monsieur Guillot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who dressing-gown and slippers gives</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And linen on him doth bestow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dressing as quickly as he can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eugene directs the trusty man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To accompany him and to escort</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A box of terrible import.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Harnessed the rapid sledge arrived:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He enters: to the mill he drives:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Descends, the order Guillot gives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fatal tubes Lepage contrived<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-76" id="noteref-76" epub:type="noteref">76</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bring behind: the triple steeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To two young oaks the coachman leads.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-24" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Lenski the foeman’s apparition</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaning against the dam expects,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Zaretski, village mechanician,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the meantime the mill inspects.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin his excuses says;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“But,” cried Zaretski in amaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Your second you have left behind!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A duellist of classic mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Method was dear unto his heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would not that a man ye slay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a lax or informal way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But followed the strict rules of art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ancient usages observed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For which our praise he hath deserved).</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-25" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“My second!” cried in turn Eugene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Behold my friend Monsieur Guillot;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To this arrangement can be seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No obstacle of which I know.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although unknown to fame mayhap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’s a straightforward little chap.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Zaretski bit his lip in wrath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to Vladimir Eugene saith:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Shall we commence?”⁠—“Let it be so,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lenski replied, and soon they be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behind the mill. Meantime ye see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Zaretski and Monsieur Guillot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In consultation stand aside⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The foes with downcast eyes abide.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-26" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Foes! Is it long since friendship rent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Asunder was and hate prepared?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since leisure was together spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meals, secrets, occupations shared?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, like hereditary foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Malignant fury they disclose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in some frenzied dream of fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These friends cold-bloodedly draw near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mutual destruction to contrive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cannot they amicably smile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere crimson stains their hands defile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Depart in peace and friendly live?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But fashionable hatred’s flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trembles at artificial shame.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-27" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The shining pistols are uncased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mallet loud the ramrod strikes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bullets are down the barrels pressed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the first time the hammer clicks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! poured in a thin gray cascade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The powder in the pan is laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sharp flint, screwed securely on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is cocked once more. Uneasy grown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Guillot behind a pollard stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aside the foes their mantles threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Zaretski paces thirty-two</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Measured with great exactitude.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At each extreme one takes his stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A loaded pistol in his hand.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-28" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Advance!”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Indifferent and sedate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The foes, as yet not taking aim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With measured step and even gait</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Athwart the snow four paces came⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Four deadly paces do they span;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin slowly then began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To raise his pistol to his eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though he advanced unceasingly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo! five paces more they pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Lenski, closing his left eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Took aim⁠—but as immediately</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin fired⁠—Alas! alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The poet’s hour hath sounded⁠—See!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He drops his pistol silently.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-29" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>He on his bosom gently placed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His hand, and fell. His clouded eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not agony, but death expressed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So from the mountain lazily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The avalanche of snow first bends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then glittering in the sun descends.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cold sweat bursting from his brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the youth Eugene hurried now⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gazed on him, called him. Useless care!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was no more! The youthful bard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For evermore had disappeared.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The storm was hushed. The blossom fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was withered ere the morning light⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The altar flame was quenched in night.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-30" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Tranquil he lay, and strange to view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The peace which on his forehead beamed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His breast was riddled through and through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blood gushed from the wound and steamed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere this but one brief moment beat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That heart with inspiration sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And enmity and hope and love⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blood boiled and the passions strove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, as in a deserted house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All dark and silent hath become;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The inmate is for ever dumb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The windows whitened, shutters close⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whither departed is the host?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God knows! The very trace is lost.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-31" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis sweet the foe to aggravate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With epigrams impertinent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet to behold him obstinate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His butting horns in anger bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The glass unwittingly inspect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And blush to own himself reflect.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweeter it is, my friends, if he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Howl like a dolt: ’tis meant for me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But sweeter still it is to arrange</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For him an honourable grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At his pale brow a shot to have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Placed at the customary range;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But home his body to despatch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can scarce in sweetness be a match.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-32" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Well, if your pistol ball by chance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The comrade of your youth should strike,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who by a haughty word or glance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or any trifle else ye like</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You o’er your wine insulted hath⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or even overcome by wrath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scornfully challenged you afield⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me, of sentiments concealed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in your spirit dominates,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When motionless your gaze beneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lies, upon his forehead death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slowly life coagulates⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When deaf and silent he doth lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heedless of your despairing cry?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-33" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Eugene, his pistol yet in hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with remorseful anguish filled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gazing on Lenski’s corse did stand⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Zaretski shouted: “Why, he’s killed!”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Killed! at this dreadful exclamation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin went with trepidation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the attendants called in haste.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most carefully Zaretski placed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within his sledge the stiffened corse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hurried home his awful freight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conscious of death approximate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loud paws the earth each panting horse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His bit with foam besprinkled o’er,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And homeward like an arrow tore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-34" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>My friends, the poet ye regret!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When hope’s delightful flower but bloomed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In bud of promise incomplete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The manly toga scarce assumed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He perished. Where his troubled dreams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where the admirable streams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of youthful impulse, reverie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tender and elevated, free?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where tempestuous love’s desires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thirst of knowledge and of fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Horror of sinfulness and shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imagination’s sacred fires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye shadows of a life more high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye dreams of heavenly poesy?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-35" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Perchance to benefit mankind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or but for fame he saw the light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His lyre, to silence now consigned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resounding through all ages might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have echoed to eternity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With worldly honours, it may be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fortune the poet had repaid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It may be that his martyred shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Carried a truth divine away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, for the century designed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had perished a creative mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And past the threshold of decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He ne’er shall hear Time’s eulogy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blessings of humanity.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-36" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Or, it may be, the bard had passed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A life in common with the rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vanished his youthful years at last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fire extinguished in his breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In many things had changed his life⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Muse abandoned, ta’en a wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inhabited the country, clad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In dressing-gown, a cuckold glad:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A life of fact, not fiction, led⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At forty suffered from the gout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eaten, drunk, gossiped and grown stout:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And finally, upon his bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had finished life amid his sons,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doctors and women, sobs and groans.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-37" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But, howsoe’er his lot were cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! the youthful lover slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poetical enthusiast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A friendly hand thy life hath ta’en!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is a spot the village near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where dwelt the Muses’ worshipper,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two pines have joined their tangled roots,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A rivulet beneath them shoots</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its waters to the neighbouring vale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There the tired ploughman loves to lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The reaping girls approach and ply</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within its wave the sounding pail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by that shady rivulet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A simple tombstone hath been set.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-38" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>There, when the rains of spring we mark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the meadows showering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shepherd plaits his shoe of bark,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-77" id="noteref-77" epub:type="noteref">77</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Volga fishermen doth sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the young damsel from the town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For summer to the country flown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whene’er across the plain at speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone she gallops on her steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stops at the tomb in passing by;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tightened leathern rein she draws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aside she casts her veil of gauze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And reads with rapid eager eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The simple epitaph⁠—a tear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth in her gentle eye appear.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-39" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And meditative from the spot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She leisurely away doth ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spite of herself with Lenski’s lot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Longtime her mind is occupied.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She muses: “What was Olga’s fate?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Longtime was her heart desolate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or did her tears soon cease to flow?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where may be her sister now?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where is the outlaw, banned by men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fashionable dames the foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The misanthrope of gloomy brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By whom the youthful bard was slain?”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In time I’ll give ye without fail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A true account and in detail.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-40" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But not at present, though sincerely</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I on my chosen hero dote;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though I’ll return to him right early,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just at this moment I cannot.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Years have inclined me to stern prose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Years to light rhyme themselves oppose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now, I mournfully confess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In rhyming I show laziness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As once, to fill the rapid page</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My pen no longer finds delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Other and colder thoughts affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sterner solicitudes engage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In worldly din or solitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon my visions such intrude.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-41" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Fresh aspirations I have known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am acquainted with fresh care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hopeless are all the first, I own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet still remains the old despair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Illusions, dream, where, where your sweetness?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where youth (the proper rhyme is fleetness)?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And is it true her garland bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last is shrunk and withered quite?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And is it true and not a jest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not even a poetic phrase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That vanished are my youthful days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(This joking I used to protest),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never for me to reappear⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That soon I reach my thirtieth year?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-42" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And so my noon hath come! If so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must resign myself, in sooth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet let us part in friendship, O</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My frivolous and jolly youth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thank thee for thy joyfulness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love’s tender transports and distress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For riot, frolics, mighty feeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all that from thy hand proceeds⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thank thee. In thy company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With tumult or contentment still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thy delights I drank my fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enough! with tranquil spirit I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Commence a new career in life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rest from bygone days of strife.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-43" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But pause! Thou calm retreats, farewell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where my days in the wilderness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of languor and of love did tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And contemplative dreaminess;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou, youth’s early inspiration,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Invigorate imagination</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spur my spirit’s torpid mood!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fly frequent to my solitude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let not the poet’s spirit freeze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grow harsh and cruel, dead and dry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eventually petrify</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the world’s mortal revelries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid the soulless sons of pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And glittering simpletons beside;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-44" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Amid sly, pusillanimous</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spoiled children most degenerate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tiresome rogues ridiculous</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stupid censors passionate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid coquettes who pray to God</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And abject slaves who kiss the rod;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In haunts of fashion where each day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All with urbanity betray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where harsh frivolity proclaims</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its cold unfeeling sentences;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid the awful emptiness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of conversation, thought and aims⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that morass where you and I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wallow, my friends, in company!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
