<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto the First: “The Spleen”</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal">the First</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">“The Spleen”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a></p>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>“He rushes at life and exhausts the passions.”</p>
					<cite>Prince Viazemski</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<section id="canto-1-1" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“My uncle’s goodness is extreme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If seriously he hath disease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hath acquired the world’s esteem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nothing more important sees;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A paragon of virtue he!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what a nuisance it will be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chained to his bedside night and day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without a chance to slip away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye need dissimulation base</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dying man with art to soothe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath his head the pillow smooth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And physic bring with mournful face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sigh and meditate alone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When will the devil take his own!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-2" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thus mused a madcap young, who drove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through clouds of dust at postal pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the decree of Mighty Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inheritor of all his race.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Friends of Liudmila and Ruslan,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me present ye to the man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who without more prevarication</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hero is of my narration!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin, O my gentle readers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was born beside the Neva, where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It may be ye were born, or there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have shone as one of fashion’s leaders.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I also wandered there of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But cannot stand the northern cold.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-3" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Having performed his service truly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deep into debt his father ran;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three balls a year he gave ye duly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last became a ruined man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Eugene was by fate preserved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For first “madame” his wants observed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then “monsieur” supplied her place;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The boy was wild but full of grace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Monsieur l’Abbé,” a starving Gaul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fearing his pupil to annoy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instructed jestingly the boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Morality taught scarce at all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gently for pranks he would reprove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the Summer Garden rove.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-4" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When youth’s rebellious hour drew near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my Eugene the path must trace⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The path of hope and tender fear⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Monsieur clean out of doors they chase.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! my Onegin free as air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cropped in the latest style his hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dressed like a London dandy he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The giddy world at last shall see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wrote and spoke, so all allowed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the French language perfectly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Danced the mazurka gracefully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without the least constraint he bowed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What more’s required? The world replies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is a charming youth and wise.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-5" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>
					<span>We all of us of education</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A something somehow have obtained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus, praised be God! a reputation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With us is easily attained.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin was⁠—so many deemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>[Unerring critics self-esteemed],</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pedantic although scholar like,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In truth he had the happy trick</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without constraint in conversation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of touching lightly every theme.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silent, oracular ye’d see him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid a serious disputation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then suddenly discharge a joke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ladies’ laughter to provoke.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-6" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Latin is just now not in vogue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if the truth I must relate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin knew enough, the rogue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mild quotation to translate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little Juvenal to spout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With “vale” finish off a note;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two verses he could recollect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the Aeneid, but incorrect.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In history he took no pleasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dusty chronicles of earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For him were but of little worth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet still of anecdotes a treasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within his memory there lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Romulus unto our day.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-7" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>For empty sound the rascal swore he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Existence would not make a curse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knew not an iamb from a choree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although we read him heaps of verse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Homer, Theocritus, he jeered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Adam Smith to read appeared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at economy was great;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is, he could elucidate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How empires store of wealth unfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How flourish, why and wherefore less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If the raw product they possess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The medium is required of gold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The father scarcely understands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His son and mortgages his lands.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-8" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But upon all that Eugene knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have no leisure here to dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But say he was a genius who</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In one thing really did excel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It occupied him from a boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A labour, torment, yet a joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It whiled his idle hours away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wholly occupied his day⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The amatory science warm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Ovid once immortalized,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which the poet agonized</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laid down his life of sun and storm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the steppes of Moldavia lone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from his Italy⁠—his own.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-9" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>How soon he learnt deception’s art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hope to conceal and jealousy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>False confidence or doubt to impart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sombre or glad in turn to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haughty appear, subservient,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Obsequious or indifferent!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What languor would his silence show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How full of fire his speech would glow!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How artless was the note which spoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of love again, and yet again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How deftly could he transport feign!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How bright and tender was his look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Modest yet daring! And a tear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would at the proper time appear.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-10" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
				<p>
					<span>How well he played the greenhorn’s part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cheat the inexperienced fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes by pleasing flattery’s art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes by ready-made despair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The feeble moment would espy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of tender years the modesty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conquer by passion and address,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Await the long-delayed caress.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Avowal then ’twas time to pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attentive to the heart’s first beating,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Follow up love⁠—a secret meeting</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arrange without the least delay⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, then⁠—well, in some solitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lessons to give he understood!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-11" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>How soon he learnt to titillate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heart of the inveterate flirt!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desirous to annihilate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His own antagonists expert,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How bitterly he would malign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many a snare their pathway line!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ye, O happy husbands, ye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With him were friends eternally:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The crafty spouse caressed him, who</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Faublas in his youth was schooled,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the suspicious veteran old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pompous, swaggering cuckold too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who floats contentedly through life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proud of his dinners and his wife!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-12" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>One morn whilst yet in bed he lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His valet brings him letters three.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What, invitations? The same day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As many entertainments be!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A ball here, there a children’s treat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whither shall my rapscallion flit?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whither shall he go first? He’ll see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perchance he will to all the three.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meantime in matutinal dress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hat surnamed a “Bolivar”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hies unto the “Boulevard,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To loiter there in idleness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until the sleepless Bréguet chime<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Announcing to him dinner-time.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-13" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis dark. He seats him in a sleigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Drive on!” the cheerful cry goes forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His furs are powdered on the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the fine silver of the north.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He bends his course to Talon’s, where<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knows Kavèrine will repair.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-12" id="noteref-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He enters. High the cork arose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Comet champagne foaming flows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before him red roast beef is seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And truffles, dear to youthful eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flanked by immortal Strasbourg pies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The choicest flowers of French cuisine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Limburg cheese alive and old</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is seen next pine-apples of gold.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-14" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Still thirst fresh draughts of wine compels</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cool the cutlets’ seething grease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the sonorous Bréguet tells</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the commencement of the piece.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A critic of the stage malicious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A slave of actresses capricious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin was a citizen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the domains of the side-scene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the theatre he repairs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where each young critic ready stands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Capers applauds with clap of hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hisses Cleopatra scares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moina recalls for this alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all may hear his voice’s tone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-15" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thou fairy-land! Where formerly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shone pungent Satire’s dauntless king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Von Wisine, friend of liberty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Kniajnine, apt at copying.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The young Simeonova too there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Ozeroff was wont to share</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Applause, the people’s donative.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There our Katènine did revive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Corneille’s majestic genius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sarcastic Shàkhovskoi brought out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His comedies, a noisy rout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There Didelot became glorious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, there, beneath the side-scene’s shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The drama of my youth was played.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-13" id="noteref-13" epub:type="noteref">13</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-16" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>My goddesses, where are your shades?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do ye not hear my mournful sighs?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are ye replaced by other maids</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who cannot conjure former joys?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall I your chorus hear anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Russia’s Terpsichore review</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again in her ethereal dance?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or will my melancholy glance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the dull stage find all things changed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The disenchanted glass direct</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where I can no more recollect?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A careless looker-on estranged</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In silence shall I sit and yawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dream of life’s delightful dawn?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-17" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The house is crammed. A thousand lamps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On pit, stalls, boxes, brightly blaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impatiently the gallery stamps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The curtain now they slowly raise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Obedient to the magic strings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brilliant, ethereal, there springs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth from the crowd of nymphs surrounding</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Istòmina<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a> the nimbly-bounding;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With one foot resting on its tip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slow circling round its fellow swings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now she skips and now she springs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like down from Aeolus’s lip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now her lithe form she arches o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And beats with rapid foot the floor.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-18" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Shouts of applause! Onegin passes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between the stalls, along the toes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seated, a curious look with glasses</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On unknown female forms he throws.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Free scope he yields unto his glance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reviews both dress and countenance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all dissatisfaction shows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To male acquaintances he bows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And finally he deigns let fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the stage his weary glance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He yawns, averts his countenance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exclaiming, “We must change ’em all!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I long by ballets have been bored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now Didelot scarce can be endured!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-19" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Snakes, satyrs, loves with many a shout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Across the stage still madly sweep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst the tired serving-men without</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrapped in their sheepskins soundly sleep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still the loud stamping doth not cease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still they blow noses, cough, and sneeze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still everywhere, without, within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lamps illuminating shine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The steed benumbed still pawing stands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of the irksome harness tires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still the coachmen round the fires<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abuse their masters, rub their hands:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Eugene long hath left the press</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To array himself in evening dress.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-20" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Faithfully shall I now depict,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Portray the solitary den</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein the child of fashion strict</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dressed him, undressed, and dressed again?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that industrial London brings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For tallow, wood and other things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Across the Baltic’s salt sea waves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All which caprice and affluence craves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All which in Paris eager taste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Choosing a profitable trade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For our amusement ever made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ease and fashionable waste⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adorned the apartment of Eugene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Philosopher just turned eighteen.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-21" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>China and bronze the tables weight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amber on pipes from Stamboul glows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, joy of souls effeminate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Phials of crystal scents enclose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Combs of all sizes, files of steel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scissors both straight and curved as well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thirty different sorts, lo! brushes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both for the nails and for the tushes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rousseau, I would remark in passing,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-16" id="noteref-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could not conceive how serious Grimm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dared calmly cleanse his nails ’fore him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eloquent raver all-surpassing⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The friend of liberty and laws</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this case quite mistaken was.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-22" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The most industrious man alive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May yet be studious of his nails;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What boots it with the age to strive?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Custom the despot soon prevails.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A new Kavèrine Eugene mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dreading the world’s remarks malign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was that which we are wont to call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fop, in dress pedantical.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three mortal hours per diem he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would loiter by the looking-glass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from his dressing-room would pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Venus when, capriciously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goddess would a masquerade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attend in male attire arrayed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-23" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>On this artistical retreat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Having once fixed your interest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I might to connoisseurs repeat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The style in which my hero dressed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though I confess I hardly dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Describe in detail the affair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since words like pantaloons, vest, coat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Russ indigenous are not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And also that my feeble verse⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pardon I ask for such a sin⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With words of foreign origin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too much I’m given to intersperse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though to the Academy I come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And oft its Dictionary thumb.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-17" id="noteref-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-24" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But such is not my project now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So let us to the ball-room haste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whither at headlong speed doth go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eugene in hackney carriage placed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past darkened windows and long streets</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of slumbering citizens he fleets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till carriage lamps, a double row,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cast a gay lustre on the snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which shines with iridescent hues.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He nears a spacious mansion’s gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By many a lamp illuminate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through the lofty windows views</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Profiles of lovely dames he knows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And also fashionable beaux.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-25" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Our hero stops and doth alight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flies past the porter to the stair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, ere he mounts the marble flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hurried hand smooths down his hair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He enters: in the hall a crowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more the music thunders loud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some a mazurka occupies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crushing and a confusing noise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spurs of the Cavalier Guard clash,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The feet of graceful ladies fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And following them ye might espy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full many a glance like lightning flash,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by the fiddle’s rushing sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The voice of jealousy is drowned.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-26" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>In my young days of wild delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On balls I madly used to dote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fond declarations they invite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the delivery of a note.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So hearken, every worthy spouse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would your vigilance arouse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attentive be unto my rhymes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And due precautions take betimes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye mothers also, caution use,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon your daughters keep an eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Employ your glasses constantly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For otherwise⁠—God only knows!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I lift a warning voice because</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I long have ceased to offend the laws.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-27" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Alas! life’s hours which swiftly fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve wasted in amusements vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But were it not immoral I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should dearly like a dance again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I love its furious delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The crowd and merriment and light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ladies, their fantastic dress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Also their feet⁠—yet ne’ertheless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarcely in Russia can ye find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three pairs of handsome female feet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! I still struggle to forget</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pair; though desolate my mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their memory lingers still and seems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To agitate me in my dreams.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-28" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When, where, and in what desert land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Madman, wilt thou from memory raze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those feet? Alas! on what far strand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do ye of spring the blossoms graze?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lapped in your Eastern luxury,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No trace ye left in passing by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the dreary northern snows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But better loved the soft repose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of splendid carpets richly wrought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I once forgot for your sweet cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thirst for fame and man’s applause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My country and an exile’s lot;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My joy in youth was fleeting e’en</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As your light footprints on the green.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-29" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Diana’s bosom, Flora’s cheeks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are admirable, my dear friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But yet Terpsichore bespeaks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charms more enduring in the end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For promises her feet reveal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of untold gain she must conceal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their privileged allurements fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hidden train of wild desire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I love them, O my dear Elvine,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-18" id="noteref-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the table-cloth of white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In winter on the fender bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In springtime on the meadows green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the ball-room’s glassy floor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or by the ocean’s rocky shore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-30" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Beside the stormy sea one day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I envied sore the billows tall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which rushed in eager dense array</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enamoured at her feet to fall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How like the billow I desired</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To kiss the feet which I admired!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, never in the early blaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fiery youth’s untutored days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So ardently did I desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A young Armida’s lips to press,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her cheek of rosy loveliness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or bosom full of languid fire⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gust of passion never tore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My spirit with such pangs before.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-31" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Another time, so willed it Fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Immersed in secret thought I stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grasp a stirrup fortunate⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her foot was in my other hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again imagination blazed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The contact of the foot I raised</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rekindled in my withered heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fires of passion and its smart⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away! and cease to ring their praise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ever with thy tattling lyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The proud ones are not worth the fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of passion they so often raise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The words and looks of charmers sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are oft deceptive⁠—like their feet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-32" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Where is Onegin? Half asleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Straight from the ball to bed he goes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst Petersburg from slumber deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The drum already doth arouse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shopman and the pedlar rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the Bourse the cabman plies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Okhtenka with pitcher speeds,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-19" id="noteref-19" epub:type="noteref">19</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crunching the morning snow she treads;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Morning awakes with joyous sound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shutters open; to the skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In column blue the smoke doth rise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The German baker looks around</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His shop, a nightcap on his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pauses oft to serve out bread.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-33" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But turning morning into night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tired by the ball’s incessant noise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The votary of vain delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sleep in the shadowy couch enjoys,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Late in the afternoon to rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the same life before him lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till morn⁠—life uniform but gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-morrow just like yesterday.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But was our friend Eugene content,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Free, in the blossom of his spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amidst successes flattering</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pleasure’s daily blandishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or vainly ’mid luxurious fare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was he in health and void of care?⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-34" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Even so! His passions soon abated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hateful the hollow world became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor long his mind was agitated</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By love’s inevitable flame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For treachery had done its worst;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Friendship and friends he likewise curst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because he could not gourmandise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Daily beefsteaks and Strasbourg pies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And irrigate them with champagne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor slander viciously could spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whene’er he had an aching head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, though a plucky scatterbrain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He finally lost all delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In bullets, sabres, and in fight.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-35" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>His malady, whose cause I ween</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It now to investigate is time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was nothing but the British spleen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transported to our Russian clime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It gradually possessed his mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though, God be praised! he ne’er designed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To slay himself with blade or ball,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indifferent he became to all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like Childe Harold gloomily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He to the festival repairs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor boston nor the world’s affairs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor tender glance nor amorous sigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impressed him in the least degree⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Callous to all he seemed to be.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-36" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Ye miracles of courtly grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He left <em>you</em> first, and I must own</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The manners of the highest class</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have latterly vexatious grown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though perchance a lady may</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Discourse of Bentham or of Say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet as a rule their talk I call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Harmless, but quite nonsensical.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then they’re so innocent of vice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So full of piety, correct,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So prudent, and so circumspect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stately, devoid of prejudice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So inaccessible to men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their looks alone produce the spleen.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-20" id="noteref-20" epub:type="noteref">20</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-37" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And you, my youthful damsels fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom latterly one often meets</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Urging your droshkies swift as air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along Saint Petersburg’s paved streets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From you too Eugene took to flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abandoning insane delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And isolated from all men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yawning betook him to a pen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He thought to write, but labour long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inspired him with disgust and so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nought from his pen did ever flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus he never fell among</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That vicious set whom I don’t blame⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because a member I became.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-38" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Once more to idleness consigned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He felt the laudable desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From mere vacuity of mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wit of others to acquire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A case of books he doth obtain⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He reads at random, reads in vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This nonsense, that dishonest seems,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This wicked, that absurd he deems,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All are constrained and fetters bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Antiquity no pleasure gave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The moderns of the ancients rave⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Books he abandoned like the fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His book-shelf instantly doth drape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With taffety instead of crape.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-39" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Having abjured the haunts of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like him renouncing vanity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His friendship I acquired just then;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His character attracted me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An innate love of meditation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Original imagination,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cool sagacious mind he had:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was incensed and he was sad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both were of passion satiate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And both of dull existence tired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Extinct the flame which once had fired;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both were expectant of the hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which blind Fortune oft betrays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very morning of our days.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-40" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</h3>
				<p>
					<span>He who hath lived and living, thinks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must e’en despise his kind at last;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who hath suffered ofttimes shrinks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From shades of the relentless past.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No fond illusions live to soothe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But memory like a serpent’s tooth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With late repentance gnaws and stings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All this in many cases brings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A charm with it in conversation.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin’s speeches I abhorred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At first, but soon became inured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the sarcastic observation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To witticisms and taunts half-vicious</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gloomy epigrams malicious.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-41" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>How oft, when on a summer night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transparent o’er the Neva beamed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The firmament in mellow light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when the watery mirror gleamed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more with pale Diana’s rays,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-21" id="noteref-21" epub:type="noteref">21</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>We called to mind our youthful days⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The days of love and of romance!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then would we muse as in a trance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impressionable for an hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And breathe the balmy breath of night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like the prisoner’s our delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who for the greenwood quits his tower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As on the rapid wings of thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The early days of life we sought.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-42" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Absorbed in melancholy mood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And o’er the granite coping bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin meditative stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’en as the poet says he leant.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-22" id="noteref-22" epub:type="noteref">22</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis silent all! Alone the cries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the night sentinels arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the Millionaya afar<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-23" id="noteref-23" epub:type="noteref">23</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sudden rattling of a car.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! on the sleeping river borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A boat with splashing oar floats by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now we hear delightedly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A jolly song and distant horn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But sweeter in a midnight dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Torquato Tasso’s strains I deem.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-43" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Ye billows of blue Hadria’s sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Brenta, once more we shall meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, inspiration firing me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your magic voices I shall greet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose tones Apollo’s sons inspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after Albion’s proud lyre<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-24" id="noteref-24" epub:type="noteref">24</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Possess my love and sympathy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nights of golden Italy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll pass beneath the firmament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hid in the gondola’s dark shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone with my Venetian maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now talkative, now reticent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From her my lips shall learn the tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of love which whilom Petrarch sung.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-44" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When will my hour of freedom come!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time, I invoke thee! favouring gales</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awaiting on the shore I roam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And beckon to the passing sails.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the highway of the sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When shall I wing my passage free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On waves by tempests curdled o’er!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis time to quit this weary shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So uncongenial to my mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dream upon the sunny strand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Africa, ancestral land,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-25" id="noteref-25" epub:type="noteref">25</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dreary Russia left behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein I felt love’s fatal dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein I buried left my heart.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-45" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Eugene designed with me to start</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And visit many a foreign clime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Fortune cast our lots apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For a protracted space of time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just at that time his father died,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soon Onegin’s door beside</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of creditors a hungry rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their claims and explanations shout.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Eugene, hating litigation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with his lot in life content,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To a surrender gave consent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeing in this no deprivation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or counting on his uncle’s death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what the old man might bequeath.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-46" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And in reality one day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The steward sent a note to tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How sick to death his uncle lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wished to say to him farewell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Having this mournful document</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perused, Eugene in postchaise went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hastened to his uncle’s side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in his heart dissatisfied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Having for money’s sake alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sorrow to counterfeit and wail⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus we began our little tale⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, to his uncle’s mansion flown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He found him on the table laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A due which must to earth be paid.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-47" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The courtyard full of serfs he sees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the country all around</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had come both friends and enemies⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Funeral amateurs abound!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The body they consigned to rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then made merry pope and guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With serious air then went away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As men who much had done that day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! my Onegin rural lord!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mines and meadows, woods and lakes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He now a full possession takes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who economy abhorred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delighted much his former ways</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To vary for a few brief days.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-48" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>For two whole days it seemed a change</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wander through the meadows still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cool dark oaken grove to range,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To listen to the rippling rill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But on the third of grove and mead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He took no more the slightest heed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They made him feel inclined to doze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the conviction soon arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ennui can in the country dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though without palaces and streets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cards, balls, routs, poetry or fêtes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On him spleen mounted sentinel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like his shadow dogged his life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or better⁠—like a faithful wife.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-49" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I was for calm existence made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For rural solitude and dreams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My lyre sings sweeter in the shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And more imagination teems.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On innocent delights I dote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon my lake I love to float,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For law I <i xml:lang="it">far niente</i> take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every morning I awake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The child of sloth and liberty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I slumber much, a little read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fleeting glory take no heed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In former years thus did not I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In idleness and tranquil joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The happiest days of life employ?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-50" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Love, flowers, the country, idleness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fields my joys have ever been;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I like the difference to express</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between myself and my Eugene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest the malicious reader or</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some one or other editor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of keen sarcastic intellect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Herein my portrait should detect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And impiously should declare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sketch myself that I have tried</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Byron, bard of scorn and pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if impossible it were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To write of any other elf</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than one’s own fascinating self.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-51" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Here I remark all poets are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love to idealize inclined;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have dreamed many a vision fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the recesses of my mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Retained the image, though short-lived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which afterwards the muse revived.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus carelessly I once portrayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine own ideal, the mountain maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The captives of the Salguir’s shore.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now a question in this wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft upon friendly lips doth rise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom doth thy plaintive Muse adore?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom amongst the jealous throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of maids dost thou inscribe thy song?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-52" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Whose glance reflecting inspiration</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With tenderness hath recognized</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy meditative incantation⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom hath thy strain immortalized?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None, be my witness Heaven above!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The malady of hopeless love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have endured without respite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Happy who thereto can unite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poetic transport. They impart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A double force unto their song</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who following Petrarch move along</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ease the tortures of the heart⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perchance they laurels also cull⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I, in love, was mute and dull.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-53" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The Muse appeared, when love passed by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my dark soul to light was brought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Free, I renewed the idolatry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of harmony enshrining thought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I write, and anguish flies away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor doth my absent pen portray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around my stanzas incomplete</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young ladies’ faces and their feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Extinguished ashes do not blaze⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I mourn, but tears I cannot shed⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon, of the tempest which hath fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time will the ravages efface⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that time comes, a poem I’ll strive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To write in cantos twenty-five.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-54" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I’ve thought well o’er the general plan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hero’s name too in advance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meantime I’ll finish whilst I can</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Canto the First of this romance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve scanned it with a jealous eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Discovered much absurdity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But will not modify a tittle⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I owe the censorship a little.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For journalistic deglutition</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I yield the fruit of work severe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go, on the Neva’s bank appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My very latest composition!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enjoy the meed which Fame bestows⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Misunderstanding, words and blows.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
