<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto the Second: The Poet</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal">the Second</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">The Poet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a></p>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>“O Rus!”</p>
					<cite>Horace</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<section id="canto-2-1" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The village wherein yawned Eugene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was a delightful little spot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There friends of pure delight had been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grateful to Heaven for their lot.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lonely mansion-house to screen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From gales a hill behind was seen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before it ran a stream. Behold!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Afar, where clothed in green and gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meadows and cornfields are displayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Villages in the distance show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And herds of oxen wandering low;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst nearer, sunk in deeper shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thick immense neglected grove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Extended⁠—haunt which Dryads love.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-2" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>’Twas built, the venerable pile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As lordly mansions ought to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In solid, unpretentious style,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The style of wise antiquity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lofty the chambers one and all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silk tapestry upon the wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imperial portraits hang around</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stoves of various shapes abound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All this I know is out of date,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot tell the reason why,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Eugene, incontestably,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The matter did not agitate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because he yawned at the bare view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of drawing-rooms or old or new.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-3" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>He took the room wherein the old</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Man⁠—forty years long in this wise⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His housekeeper was wont to scold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look through the window and kill flies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas plain⁠—an oaken floor ye scan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two cupboards, table, soft divan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not a speck of dirt descried.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin oped the cupboards wide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In one he doth accounts behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here bottles stand in close array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There jars of cider block the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An almanac but eight years old.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His uncle, busy man indeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No other book had time to read.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-4" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Alone amid possessions great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eugene at first began to dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If but to lighten Time’s dull rate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of many an economic scheme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This anchorite amid his waste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ancient <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">barshtchina</i> replaced</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By an obrok’s indulgent rate:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The peasant blessed his happy fate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But this a heinous crime appeared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto his neighbour, man of thrift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who secretly denounced the gift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many another slyly sneered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all with one accord agreed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was a dangerous fool indeed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-5" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>
					<span>All visited him at first, of course;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But since to the backdoor they led</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most usually a Cossack horse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the Don’s broad pastures bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If they but heard domestic loads</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come rumbling up the neighbouring roads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most by this circumstance offended</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All overtures of friendship ended.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Oh! what a fool our neighbour is!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’s a freemason, so we think.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone he doth his claret drink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lady’s hand doth never kiss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis <em>yes! no!</em> never <em>madam! sir!</em>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-29" id="noteref-29" epub:type="noteref">29</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>This was his social character.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-6" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Into the district then to boot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A new proprietor arrived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From whose analysis minute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The neighbourhood fresh sport derived.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vladimir Lenski was his name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Gottingen inspired he came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A worshipper of Kant, a bard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A young and handsome galliard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He brought from mystic Germany</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fruits of learning and combined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fiery and eccentric mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Idolatry of liberty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wild enthusiastic tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Black curls which to his shoulders hung.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-7" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The pervert world with icy chill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had not yet withered his young breast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His heart reciprocated still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Friendship smiled or Love caressed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was a dear delightful fool⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A nursling yet for Hope to school.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The riot of the world and glare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still sovereigns of his spirit were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by a sweet delusion he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would soothe the doubtings of his soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He deemed of human life the goal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be a charming mystery:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He racked his brains to find its clue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And marvels deemed he thus should view.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-8" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>This he believed: a kindred spirit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impelled to union with his own</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay languishing both day and night⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waiting his coming⁠—his alone!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He deemed his friends but longed to make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great sacrifices for his sake!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That a friend’s arm in every case</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Felled a calumniator base!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That chosen heroes consecrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Friends of the sons of every land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exist⁠—that their immortal band</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall surely, be it soon or late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pour on this orb a dazzling light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bless mankind with full delight.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-9" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Compassion now or wrath inspires</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now philanthropy his soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now his youthful heart desires</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The path which leads to glory’s goal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His harp beneath that sky had rung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where sometime Goethe, Schiller sung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the altar of their fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He kindled his poetic flame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But from the Muses’ loftiest height</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gifted songster never swerved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But proudly in his song preserved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An ever transcendental flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His transports were quite maidenly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charming with grave simplicity.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-10" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
				<p>
					<span>He sang of love⁠—to love a slave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His ditties were as pure and bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thoughts which gentle maidens have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a babe’s slumber, or the light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the moon in the tranquil skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Goddess of lovers’ tender sighs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sang of separation grim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of what not, and of distant dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of roses to romancers dear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To foreign lands he would allude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where long time he in solitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had let fall many a bitter tear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sang of life’s fresh colours stained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before he eighteen years attained.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-11" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Since Eugene in that solitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gifts such as these alone could prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A scant attendance Lenski showed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At neighbouring hospitalities.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shunned those parties boisterous;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The conversation tedious</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the crop of hay, the wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The kennel or a kindred line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was certainly not erudite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor sparkled with poetic fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor wit, nor did the same inspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sense of social delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still more stupid did appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gossip of their ladies fair.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-12" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Handsome and rich, the neighbourhood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lenski as a good match received⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such is the country custom good;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All mothers their sweet girls believed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suitable for this semi-Russian.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He enters: rapidly discussion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shifts, tacks about, until they prate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sorrows of a single state.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perchance where Dunia pours out tea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The young proprietor we find;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Dunia then they whisper: Mind!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a guitar produced we see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Heavens! warbled forth we hear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>Come to my golden palace, dear</em>!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-30" id="noteref-30" epub:type="noteref">30</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-13" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But Lenski, having no desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vows matrimonial to break,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With our Onegin doth aspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Acquaintance instantly to make.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They met. Earth, water, prose and verse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ice and flame, are not diverse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If they were similar in aught.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At first such contradictions wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mutual repulsion and ennui,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But grown familiar side by side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On horseback every day they ride⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inseparable soon they be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus oft⁠—this I myself confess⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men become friends from idleness.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-14" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But even thus not now-a-days!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In spite of common sense we’re wont</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ciphers others to appraise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ourselves as unities to count;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like Napoleons each of us</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A million bipeds reckons thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One instrument for his own use⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feeling is silly, dangerous.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eugene, more tolerant than this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Though certainly mankind he knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And usually despised it too),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exceptionless as no rule is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A few of different temper deemed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feeling in others much esteemed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-15" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>With smiling face he Lenski hears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The poet’s fervid conversation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And judgment which unsteady veers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eye which gleams with inspiration⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All this was novel to Eugene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cold reply with gloomy mien</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He oft upon his lips would curb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thinking: ’tis foolish to disturb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This evanescent boyish bliss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time without me will lessons give,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So meantime let him joyous live</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And deem the world perfection is!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgive the fever youth inspires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And youthful madness, youthful fires.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-16" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The gulf between them was so vast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Debate commanded ample food⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The laws of generations past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fruits of science, evil, good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The prejudices all men have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fatal secrets of the grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And life and fate in turn selected</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were to analysis subjected.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fervid poet would recite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Carried away by ecstasy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fragments of northern poetry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst Eugene condescending quite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though scarcely following what was said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attentive listened to the lad.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-17" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But more the passions occupy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The converse of our hermits twain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, heaving a regretful sigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An exile from their troublous reign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eugene would speak regarding these.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrice happy who their agonies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath suffered but indifferent grown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still happier he who ne’er hath known!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By absence who hath chilled his love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His hate by slander, and who spends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Existence without wife or friends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom jealous transport cannot move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And who the rent-roll of his race</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne’er trusted to the treacherous ace.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-18" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When, wise at length, we seek repose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the flag of Quietude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Passion’s fire no longer glows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when her violence reviewed⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each gust of temper, silly word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seems so unnatural and absurd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reduced with effort unto sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We hear with interest intense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The accents wild of other’s woes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They stir the heart as heretofore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So ancient warriors, battles o’er,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A curious interest disclose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In yarns of youthful troopers gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lost in the hamlet far away.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-19" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And in addition youth is flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cannot anything conceal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is ever ready to proclaim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The love, hate, sorrow, joy, we feel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deeming himself a veteran scarred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In love’s campaigns Onegin heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With quite a lachrymose expression</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The youthful poet’s fond confession.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He with an innocence extreme</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His inner consciousness laid bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Eugene soon discovered there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The story of his young love’s dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where plentifully feelings flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which we experienced long ago.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-20" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Alas! he loved as in our times</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men love no more, as only the</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mad spirit of the man who rhymes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is still condemned in love to be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One image occupied his mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Constant affection intertwined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And an habitual sense of pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And distance interposed in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor years of separation all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor homage which the Muse demands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor beauties of far distant lands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor study, banquet, rout nor ball</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His constant soul could ever tire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which glowed with virginal desire.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-21" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When but a boy he Olga loved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unknown as yet the aching heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He witnessed tenderly and moved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her girlish gaiety and sport.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the sheltering oak tree’s shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He with his little maiden played,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst the fond parents, friends thro’ life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dreamed in the future man and wife.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And full of innocent delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in a thicket’s humble shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath her parents’ eyes the maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grew like a lily pure and white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unseen in thick and tangled grass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By bee and butterfly which pass.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-22" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>’Twas she who first within his breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poetic transport did infuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thoughts of Olga first impressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mournful temper on his Muse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Farewell! thou golden days of love!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas then he loved the tangled grove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And solitude and calm delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The moon, the stars, and shining night⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The moon, the lamp of heaven above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom we used to consecrate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A promenade in twilight late</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With tears which secret sufferers love⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now in her effulgence pale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A substitute for lamps we hail!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-23" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Obedient she had ever been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And modest, cheerful as the morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a poetic life serene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet as the kiss of lovers sworn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her eyes were of cerulean blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her locks were of a golden hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her movements, voice and figure slight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All about Olga⁠—to a light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Romance of love I pray refer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’ll find her portrait there, I vouch;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I formerly admired her much</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But finally grew bored by her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with her elder sister I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must now my stanzas occupy.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-24" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Tattiana was her appellation.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We are the first who such a name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In pages of a love narration</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With such a perversity proclaim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wherefore not?⁠—’Tis pleasant, nice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Euphonious, though I know a spice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It carries of antiquity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of the attic. Honestly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We must admit but little taste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth in us or our names appear<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-31" id="noteref-31" epub:type="noteref">31</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>(I speak not of our poems here),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And education runs to waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endowing us from out her store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With affectation⁠—nothing more.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-25" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And so Tattiana was her name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor by her sister’s brilliancy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor by her beauty she became</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cynosure of every eye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shy, silent did the maid appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in the timid forest deer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even beneath her parents’ roof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood as estranged from all aloof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nearest and dearest knew not how</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fawn upon and love express;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A child devoid of childishness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To romp and play she ne’er would go:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft staring through the window pane</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would she in silence long remain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-26" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Contemplativeness, her delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’en from her cradle’s earliest dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adorned with many a vision bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of rural life the sluggish stream;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne’er touched her fingers indolent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The needle nor, o’er framework bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would she the canvas tight enrich</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With gay design and silken stitch.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desire to rule ye may observe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the obedient doll in sport</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An infant maiden doth exhort</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Polite demeanour to preserve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gravely repeating to another</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Recent instructions of its mother.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-27" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But Tania ne’er displayed a passion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For dolls, e’en from her earliest years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gossip of the town and fashion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She ne’er repeated unto hers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strange unto her each childish game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when the winter season came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dark and drear the evenings were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Terrible tales she loved to hear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when for Olga nurse arrayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the broad meadow a gay rout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the young people round about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At prisoner’s base she never played.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their noisy laugh her soul annoyed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their giddy sports she ne’er enjoyed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-28" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>She loved upon the balcony</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To anticipate the break of day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When on the pallid eastern sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The starry beacons fade away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The horizon luminous doth grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Morning’s forerunners, breezes blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gradually day unfolds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In winter, when Night longer holds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hemisphere beneath her sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Longer the East inert reclines</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the moon which dimly shines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And calmly sleeps the hours away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the same hour she oped her eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And would by candlelight arise.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-29" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Romances pleased her from the first,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her all in all did constitute;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In love adventures she was versed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rousseau and Richardson to boot.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not a bad fellow was her father</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though superannuated rather;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In books he saw nought to condemn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, as he never opened them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Viewed them with not a little scorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave himself but little pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His daughter’s book to ascertain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which ’neath her pillow lay till morn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His wife was also mad upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The works of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Richardson.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-30" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>She was thus fond of Richardson</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not that she had his works perused,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or that adoring Grandison</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That rascal Lovelace she abused;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that Princess Pauline of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her Moscow cousin, often told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tale of these romantic men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her husband was a bridegroom then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she despite herself would waste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sighs on another than her lord</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose qualities appeared to afford</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More satisfaction to her taste.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her Grandison was in the Guard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A noted fop who gambled hard.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-31" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Like his, her dress was always nice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The height of fashion, fitting tight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But contrary to her advice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The girl in marriage they unite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, her distraction to allay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bridegroom sage without delay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Removed her to his country seat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where God alone knows whom she met.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She struggled hard at first thus pent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Night separated from her spouse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then became busy with the house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First reconciled and then content;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Habit was given us in distress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Heaven in lieu of happiness.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-32" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Habit alleviates the grief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inseparable from our lot;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This great discovery relief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And consolation soon begot.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then she soon ’twixt work and leisure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Found out the secret how at pleasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dominate her worthy lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And harmony was soon restored.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The workpeople she superintended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mushrooms for winter salted down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kept the accounts, shaved many a crown,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-32" id="noteref-32" epub:type="noteref">32</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bath on Saturdays attended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When angry beat her maids, I grieve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all without her husband’s leave.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-33" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>In her friends’ albums, time had been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With blood instead of ink she scrawled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Baptized Prascovia Pauline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in her conversation drawled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She wore her corset tightly bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Russian <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">N</i> with nasal sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She would pronounce <i xml:lang="fr">à la Française</i>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But soon she altered all her ways,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Corset and album and Pauline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her sentimental verses all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She soon forgot, began to call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Akulka who was once Celine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And had with waddling in the end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her caps and night-dresses to mend.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-34" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>As for her spouse he loved her dearly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In her affairs ne’er interfered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Entrusted all to her sincerely,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In dressing-gown at meals appeared.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Existence calmly sped along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And oft at eventide a throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of friends unceremonious would</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assemble from the neighbourhood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They growl a bit⁠—they scandalise⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They crack a feeble joke and smile⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus the time passes and meanwhile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Olga the tea must supervise⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis time for supper, now for bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soon the friendly troop hath fled.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-35" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>They in a peaceful life preserved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Customs by ages sanctified,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strictly the Carnival observed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ate Russian pancakes at Shrovetide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twice in the year to fast were bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of whirligigs were very fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Christmas carols, song and dance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When people with long countenance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Trinity Sunday yawned at prayer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three tears they dropt with humble mien</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a bunch of lovage green;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kvass needful was to them as air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On guests their servants used to wait</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By rank as settled by the State.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-33" id="noteref-33" epub:type="noteref">33</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-36" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thus age approached, the common doom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And death before the husband wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Opened the portals of the tomb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a new diadem supplied.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-34" id="noteref-34" epub:type="noteref">34</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just before dinner-time he slept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By neighbouring families bewept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By children and by faithful wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With deeper woe than others’ grief.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was an honest gentleman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where at last his bones repose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The epitaph on marble shows:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Demetrius Larine, sinful man,</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Servant of God and brigadier,</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Enjoyeth peaceful slumber here</i>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-37" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>To his Penates now returned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vladimir Lenski visited</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His neighbour’s lowly tomb and mourned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above the ashes of the dead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There long time sad at heart he stayed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Poor Yorick,” mournfully he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“How often in thine arms I lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How with thy medal I would play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Medal Otchakoff conferred!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-35" id="noteref-35" epub:type="noteref">35</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me he would his Olga give,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would whisper: shall I so long live?”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by a genuine sorrow stirred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lenski his pencil-case took out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And an elegiac poem wrote.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-38" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Likewise an epitaph with tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He writes upon his parents’ tomb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus ancestral dust reveres.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! on the fields of life how bloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Harvests of souls unceasingly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Providence’s dark decree!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They blossom, ripen and they fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And others rise ephemeral!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus our light race grows up and lives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A moment effervescing stirs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then seeks ancestral sepulchres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The appointed hour arrives, arrives!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And our successors soon shall drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Us from the world wherein we live.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-39" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Meantime, drink deeply of the flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of frivolous existence, friends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its insignificance I know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And care but little for its ends.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dreams I long have closed mine eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet sometimes banished hopes will rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And agitate my heart again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus it is ’twould cause me pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without the faintest trace to leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This world. I do not praise desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet still apparently aspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My mournful fate in verse to weave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That like a friendly voice its tone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rescue me from oblivion.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-40" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Perchance some heart ’twill agitate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then the stanzas of my theme</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will not, preserved by kindly Fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perish absorbed by Lethe’s stream.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then it may be, O flattering tale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some future ignoramus shall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My famous portrait indicate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cry: he was a poet great!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My gratitude do not disdain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Admirer of the peaceful Muse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose memory doth not refuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My light productions to retain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose hands indulgently caress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bays of age and helplessness.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
