<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto the Third: The Country Damsel</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal">the Third</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">The Country Damsel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-36" id="noteref-36" epub:type="noteref">36</a></p>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p xml:lang="fr">“Elle était fille, elle était amoureuse.”</p>
					<cite>Malfilatre</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<section id="canto-3-1" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Whither away? Deuce take the bard!”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Good-bye, Onegin, I must go.”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I won’t detain you; but ’tis hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To guess how you the eve pull through.”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“At Làrina’s.”⁠—“Hem, that is queer!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pray is it not a tough affair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus to assassinate the eve?”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Not at all.”⁠—“That I can’t conceive!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis something of this sort I deem.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the first place, say, am I right?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Russian household simple quite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who welcome guests with zeal extreme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Preserves and an eternal prattle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the rain and flax and cattle.”⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-2" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“No misery I see in that”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Boredom, my friend, behold the ill⁠—”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Your fashionable world I hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Domestic life attracts me still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where⁠—”⁠—“What! another eclogue spin?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For God’s sake, Lenski, don’t begin!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What! really going? ’Tis too bad!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Lenski, I should be so glad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would you to me this Phyllis show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair source of every fine idea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Verses and tears et cetera.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Present me.”⁠—“You are joking.”⁠—“No.”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Delighted.”⁠—“When?”⁠—“This very night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They will receive us with delight.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-3" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Whilst homeward by the nearest route</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our heroes at full gallop sped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can we not stealthily make out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What they in conversation said?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“How now, Onegin, yawning still?”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“ ’Tis habit, Lenski.”⁠—“Is your ill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More troublesome than usual?”⁠—“No!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How dark the night is getting though!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hallo, Andriushka, onward race!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The drive becomes monotonous⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well! Làrina appears to us</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An ancient lady full of grace.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That bilberry wine, I’m sore afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The deuce with my inside has played.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-4" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Say, of the two which was Tattiana?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“She who with melancholy face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And silent as the maid Svetlana<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-37" id="noteref-37" epub:type="noteref">37</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hard by the window took her place.”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The younger, you’re in love with her!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Well!”⁠—“I the elder should prefer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were I like you a bard by trade⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Olga’s face no life’s displayed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis a Madonna of Vandyk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An oval countenance and pink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yon silly moon upon the brink</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the horizon she is like!”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vladimir something curtly said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor further comment that night made.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-5" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Meantime Onegin’s apparition</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Làrina’s abode produced</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quite a sensation; the position</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To all good neighbours’ sport conduced.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endless conjectures all propound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And secretly their views expound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What jokes and guesses now abound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A beau is for Tattiana found!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In fact, some people were assured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wedding-day had been arranged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the date subsequently changed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till proper rings could be procured.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Lenski’s matrimonial fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They long ago had held debate.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-6" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Of course Tattiana was annoyed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By such allusions scandalous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet was her inmost soul o’erjoyed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With satisfaction marvellous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in her heart the thought sank home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am in love, my hour hath come!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus in the earth the seed expands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Obedient to warm Spring’s commands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long time her young imagination</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By indolence and languor fired</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fated nutriment desired;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And long internal agitation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had filled her youthful breast with gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She waited for⁠—I don’t know whom!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-7" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The fatal hour had come at last⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She oped her eyes and cried: ’tis he!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! for now before her passed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same warm vision constantly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now all things round about repeat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ceaselessly to the maiden sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His name: the tenderness of home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tiresome unto her hath become</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the kind-hearted servitors:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Immersed in melancholy thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She hears of conversation nought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hated casual visitors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their coming which no man expects,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stay whose length none recollects.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-8" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Now with what eager interest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She the delicious novel reads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With what avidity and zest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She drinks in those seductive deeds!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the creations which below</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From happy inspiration flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The swain of Julia Wolmar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Malek Adel and De Linar,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-38" id="noteref-38" epub:type="noteref">38</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Werther, rebellious martyr bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that unrivalled paragon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sleep-compelling Grandison,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our tender dreamer had enrolled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A single being: ’twas in fine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No other than Onegin mine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-9" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Dreaming herself the heroine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the romances she preferred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clarissa, Julia, Delphine⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-39" id="noteref-39" epub:type="noteref">39</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana through the forest erred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the bad book accompanies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon those pages she descries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her passion’s faithful counterpart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fruit of the yearnings of the heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She heaves a sigh and deep intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On raptures, sorrows not her own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She murmurs in an undertone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A letter for her hero meant:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hero, though his merit shone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was certainly no Grandison.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-10" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Alas! my friends, the years flit by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after them at headlong pace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The evanescent fashions fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In motley and amusing chase.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The world is ever altering!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Farthingales, patches, were the thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And courtier, fop, and usurer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would once in powdered wig appear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time was, the poet’s tender quill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In hopes of everlasting fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A finished madrigal would frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or couplets more ingenious still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time was, a valiant general might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Serve who could neither read nor write.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-11" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Time was, in style magniloquent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Authors replete with sacred fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their heroes used to represent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that perfection could desire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever by adverse fate oppressed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their idols they were wont to invest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With intellect, a taste refined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And handsome countenance combined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A heart wherein pure passion burnt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The excited hero in a trice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was ready for self-sacrifice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the final tome we learnt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vice had due punishment awarded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Virtue was with a bride rewarded.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-12" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But now our minds are mystified</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Virtue acts as a narcotic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vice in romance is glorified</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And triumphs in career erotic.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The monsters of the British Muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deprive our schoolgirls of repose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The idols of their adoration</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Vampire fond of meditation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Melmoth, gloomy wanderer he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Eternal Jew or the Corsair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the mysterious Sbogar.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-40" id="noteref-40" epub:type="noteref">40</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Byron’s capricious phantasy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could in romantic mantle drape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’en hopeless egoism’s dark shape.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-13" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>My friends, what means this odd digression?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May be that I by heaven’s decrees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall abdicate the bard’s profession,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shall adopt some new caprice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus having braved Apollo’s rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With humble prose I’ll fill my page</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a romance in ancient style</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall my declining years beguile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor shall my pen paint terribly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The torment born of crime unseen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But shall depict the touching scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Russian domesticity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will descant on love’s sweet dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The olden time shall be my theme.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-14" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Old people’s simple conversations</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My unpretending page shall fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their offspring’s innocent flirtations</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the old lime-tree or the rill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their Jealousy and separation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tears of reconciliation:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fresh cause of quarrel then I’ll find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But finally in wedlock bind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The passionate speeches I’ll repeat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Accents of rapture or despair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I uttered to my lady fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long ago, prostrate at her feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then they came easily enow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My tongue is somewhat rusty now.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-15" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Tattiana! sweet Tattiana, see!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What bitter tears with thee I shed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast resigned thy destiny</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto a ruthless tyrant dread.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou’lt suffer, dearest, but before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hope with her fascinating power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dire contentment shall give birth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou shalt taste the joys of earth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou’lt quaff love’s sweet envenomed stream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fantastic images shall swarm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thy imagination warm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of happy meetings thou shalt dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wheresoe’er thy footsteps err,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confront thy fated torturer!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-16" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Love’s pangs Tattiana agonize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She seeks the garden in her need⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sudden she stops, casts down her eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cares not farther to proceed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her bosom heaves whilst crimson hues</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sudden flush her cheeks suffuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Barely to draw her breath she seems,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her eye with fire unwonted gleams.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now ’tis night, the guardian moon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sails her allotted course on high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the misty woodland nigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nightingale trills forth her tune;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Restless Tattiana sleepless lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus unto her nurse did say:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-17" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Nurse, ’tis so close I cannot rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Open the window⁠—sit by me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What ails thee, dear?”⁠—“I feel depressed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Relate some ancient history.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“But which, my dear?⁠—In days of yore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within my memory I bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many an ancient legend which</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In monsters and fair dames was rich;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now my mind is desolate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What once I knew is clean forgot⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! how wretched now my lot!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“But tell me, nurse, can you relate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The days which to your youth belong?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were you in love when you were young?”⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-18" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Alack! Tattiana,” she replied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“We never loved in days of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My mother-in-law who lately died<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-41" id="noteref-41" epub:type="noteref">41</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had killed me had the like been told.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“How came you then to wed a man?”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Why, as God ordered! My Ivan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was younger than myself, my light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I myself was thirteen quite;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-42" id="noteref-42" epub:type="noteref">42</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The matchmaker a fortnight sped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her suit before my parents pressing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last my father gave his blessing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bitter tears of fright I shed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weeping they loosed my tresses long<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-43" id="noteref-43" epub:type="noteref">43</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And led me off to church with song.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-19" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Then amongst strangers I was left⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I perceive thou dost not heed⁠—”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Alas! dear nurse, my heart is cleft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mortally sick I am indeed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold, my sobs I scarce restrain⁠—”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My darling child, thou art in pain.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Lord deliver her and save!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me at once what wilt thou have?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll sprinkle thee with holy water.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How thy hands burn!”⁠—“Dear nurse, I’m well.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am⁠—in love⁠—you know⁠—don’t tell!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The Lord be with thee, O my daughter!”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the old nurse a brief prayer said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crossed with trembling hand the maid.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-20" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“I am in love,” her whispers tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The aged woman in her woe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My heart’s delight, thou art not well.”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I am in love, nurse! leave me now.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold! the moon was shining bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And showed with an uncertain light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana’s beauty, pale with care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her tears and her dishevelled hair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the footstool sitting down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside our youthful heroine fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A kerchief round her silver hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The aged nurse in ample gown,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-44" id="noteref-44" epub:type="noteref">44</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst all creation seemed to dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enchanted by the moon’s pale beam.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-21" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But borne in spirit far away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana gazes on the moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And starting suddenly doth say:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nurse, leave me. I would be alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pen, paper bring: the table too</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Draw near. I soon to sleep shall go⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good-night.” Behold! she is alone!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis silent⁠—on her shines the moon⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon her elbow she reclines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Eugene ever in her soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indites an inconsiderate scroll</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein love innocently pines.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now it is ready to be sent⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whom, Tattiana, is it meant?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-22" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I have known beauties cold and raw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Winter in their purity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Striking the intellect with awe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By dull insensibility,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I admired their common sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And natural benevolence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, I acknowledge, from them fled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For on their brows I trembling read</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The inscription o’er the gates of Hell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Abandon hope for ever here!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-45" id="noteref-45" epub:type="noteref">45</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love to inspire doth woe appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To such⁠—delightful to repel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perchance upon the Neva e’en</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Similar dames ye may have seen.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-23" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Amid submissive herds of men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Virgins miraculous I see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who selfishly unmoved remain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alike by sighs and flattery.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what astonished do I find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When harsh demeanour hath consigned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A timid love to banishment?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On fresh allurements they are bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At least by show of sympathy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At least their accents and their words</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appear attuned to softer chords;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then with blind credulity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The youthful lover once again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pursues phantasmagoria vain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-24" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Why is Tattiana guiltier deemed?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because in singleness of thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She never of deception dreamed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But trusted the ideal she wrought?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because her passion wanted art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Obeyed the impulses of heart?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because she was so innocent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Heaven her character had blent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With an imagination wild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With intellect and strong volition</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a determined disposition,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An ardent heart and yet so mild?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth love’s incautiousness in her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So irremissible appear?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-25" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O ye whom tender love hath pained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without the ken of parents both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose hearts responsive have remained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the impressions of our youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The all-entrancing joys of love⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young ladies, if ye ever strove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mystic lines to tear away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lover’s letter might convey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or into bold hands anxiously</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have e’er a precious tress consigned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or even, silent and resigned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When separation’s hour drew nigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have felt love’s agitated kiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With tears, confused emotions, bliss⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-26" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>With unanimity complete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Condemn not weak Tattiana mine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do not cold-bloodedly repeat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sneers of critics superfine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And you, O maids immaculate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom vice, if named, doth agitate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’en as the presence of a snake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I the same admonition make.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who knows? with love’s consuming flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perchance you also soon may burn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to some gallant in your turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will be ascribed by treacherous Fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The triumph of a conquest new.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The God of Love is after you!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-27" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>A coquette loves by calculation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana’s love was quite sincere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A love which knew no limitation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as the love of children dear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She did not think “procrastination</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enhances love in estimation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus secures the prey we seek.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His vanity first let us pique</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hope and then perplexity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Excruciate the heart and late</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With jealous fire resuscitate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest jaded with satiety,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The artful prisoner should seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Incessantly his chains to break.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-28" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I still a complication view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My country’s honour and repute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Demands that I translate for you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The letter which Tattiana wrote.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Russ she was by no means clever</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And read our newspapers scarce ever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in her native language she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Possessed nor ease nor fluency,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So she in French herself expressed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot help it I declare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though hitherto a lady ne’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Russ her love made manifest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never hath our language proud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In correspondence been allowed.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-46" id="noteref-46" epub:type="noteref">46</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-29" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>They wish that ladies should, I hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Learn Russian, but the Lord defend!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I can’t conceive a little dear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Well-Wisher</i> in her hand!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-47" id="noteref-47" epub:type="noteref">47</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I ask, all ye who poets are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is it not true? the objects fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom ye for unnumbered crimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had to compose in secret rhymes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom your hearts were consecrate⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did they not all the Russian tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With little knowledge and that wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In charming fashion mutilate?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did not their lips with foreign speech</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The native Russian tongue impeach?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-30" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>God grant I meet not at a ball</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or at a promenade mayhap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A schoolmaster in yellow shawl</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or a professor in tulle cap.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As rosy lips without a smile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Russian language I deem vile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without grammatical mistakes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May be, and this my terror wakes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fair of the next generation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As every journal now entreats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will teach grammatical conceits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Introduce verse in conversation.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I⁠—what is all this to me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will to the old times faithful be.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-31" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Speech careless, incorrect, but soft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With inexact pronunciation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Raises within my breast as oft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As formerly much agitation.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Repentance wields not now her spell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gallicisms I love as well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the sins of my youthful days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Bogdanovitch’s sweet lays.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-48" id="noteref-48" epub:type="noteref">48</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I must now employ my Muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the epistle of my fair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I promised!⁠—Did I so?⁠—Well, there!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now I am ready to refuse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know that Parny’s tender pen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-49" id="noteref-49" epub:type="noteref">49</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is no more cherished amongst men.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-32" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Bard of the “Feasts,” and mournful breast,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-50" id="noteref-50" epub:type="noteref">50</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou wert sitting by my side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With this immoderate request</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I should alarm our friendship tried:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In one of thine enchanting lays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To russify the foreign phrase</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of my impassioned heroine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where art thou? Come! pretensions mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I yield with a low reverence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But lonely beneath Finnish skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where melancholy rocks arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wanders in his indolence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Careless of fame his spirit high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hears not my importunity!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-33" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Tattiana’s letter I possess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I guard it as a holy thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though I read it with distress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’m o’er it ever pondering.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inspired by whom this tenderness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This gentle daring who could guess?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who this soft nonsense could impart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imprudent prattle of the heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attractive in its banefulness?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot understand. But lo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A feeble version read below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A print without the picture’s grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, as it were, the Freischutz’ score</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strummed by a timid schoolgirl o’er.</span>
				</p>
				<section id="canto-3-33-letter" epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Tattiana’s Letter to Onegin</h4>
					<p>
						<span>I write to you! Is more required?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can lower depths beyond remain?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis in your power now, if desired,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To crush me with a just disdain.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But if my lot unfortunate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You in the least commiserate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You will not all abandon me.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At first, I clung to secrecy:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Believe me, of my present shame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You never would have heard the name,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If the fond hope I could have fanned</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At times, if only once a week,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To see you by our fireside stand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To listen to the words you speak,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Address to you one single phrase</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And then to meditate for days</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of one thing till again we met.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis said you are a misanthrope,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In country solitude you mope,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And we⁠—an unattractive set⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can hearty welcome give alone.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why did you visit our poor place?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forgotten in the village lone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I never should have seen your face</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And bitter torment never known.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The untutored spirit’s pangs calmed down</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By time (who can anticipate?)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I had found my predestinate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Become a faithful wife and e’en</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A fond and careful mother been.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Another! to none other I</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My heart’s allegiance can resign,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My doom has been pronounced on high,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis Heaven’s will and I am thine.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sum of my existence gone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But promise of our meeting gave,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I feel thou wast by God sent down</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My guardian angel to the grave.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou didst to me in dreams appear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unseen thou wast already dear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thine eye subdued me with strange glance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I heard thy voice’s resonance</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Long ago. Dream it cannot be!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Scarce hadst thou entered thee I knew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I flushed up, stupefied I grew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And cried within myself: ’tis he!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is it not truth? in tones suppressed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With thee I conversed when I bore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Comfort and succour to the poor,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when I prayer to Heaven addressed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To ease the anguish of my breast.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nay! even as this instant fled,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was it not thou, O vision bright,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That glimmered through the radiant night</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And gently hovered o’er my head?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was it not thou who thus didst stoop</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To whisper comfort, love and hope?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who art thou? Guardian angel sent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or torturer malevolent?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Doubt and uncertainty decide:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All this may be an empty dream,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Delusions of a mind untried,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Providence otherwise may deem⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then be it so! My destiny</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From henceforth I confide to thee!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lo! at thy feet my tears I pour</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thy protection I implore.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Imagine! Here alone am I!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No one my anguish comprehends,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At times my reason almost bends,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And silently I here must die⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But I await thee: scarce alive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My heart with but one look revive;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or to disturb my dreams approach</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Alas! with merited reproach.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>’Tis finished. Horrible to read!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With shame I shudder and with dread⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But boldly I myself resign:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thine honour is my countersign!</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-34" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Tattiana moans and now she sighs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in her grasp the letter shakes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even the rosy wafer dries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon her tongue which fever bakes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her head upon her breast declines</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And an enchanting shoulder shines</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From her half-open vest of night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But lo! already the moon’s light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is waning. Yonder valley deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Looms gray behind the mist and morn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silvers the brook; the shepherd’s horn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arouses rustics from their sleep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis day, the family downstairs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But nought for this Tattiana cares.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-35" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The break of day she doth not see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But sits in bed with air depressed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor on the letter yet hath she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The image of her seal impressed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But gray Phillippevna the door</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Opened with care, and entering bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A cup of tea upon a tray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“ ’Tis time, my child, arise, I pray!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My beauty, thou art ready too.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My morning birdie, yesternight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was half silly with affright.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But praised be God! in health art thou!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pains of night have wholly fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy cheek is as a poppy red!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-36" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Ah! nurse, a favour do for me!”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Command me, darling, what you choose”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Do not⁠—you might⁠—suspicious be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But look you⁠—ah! do not refuse.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I call to witness God on high⁠—”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Then send your grandson quietly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take this letter to O⁠—Well!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto our neighbour. Mind you tell⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Command him not to say a word⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I mean my name not to repeat.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“To whom is it to go, my sweet?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of late I have been quite absurd⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So many neighbours here exist⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Am I to go through the whole list?”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-37" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“How dull you are this morning, nurse!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My darling, growing old am I!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In age the memory gets worse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I was sharp in times gone by.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In times gone by thy bare command⁠—”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Oh! nurse, nurse, you don’t understand!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What is thy cleverness to me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The letter is the thing, you see⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin’s letter!”⁠—“Ah! the thing!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now don’t be cross with me, my soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You know that I am now a fool⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But why are your cheeks whitening?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nothing, good nurse, there’s nothing wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But send your grandson before long.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-38" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>No answer all that day was borne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another passed; ’twas just the same.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pale as a ghost and dressed since morn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana waits. No answer came!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Olga’s admirer came that day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Tell me, why doth your comrade stay?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hostess doth interrogate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“He hath neglected us of late.”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana blushed, her heart beat quick⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“He promised here this day to ride,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lenski unto the dame replied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The post hath kept him, it is like.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shamefaced, Tattiana downward looked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if he cruelly had joked!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-39" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>’Twas dusk! Upon the table bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shrill sang the samovar at eve,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-51" id="noteref-51" epub:type="noteref">51</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The china teapot too ye might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In clouds of steam above perceive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the cups already sped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Olga’s hand distributed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fragrant tea in darkling stream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a boy handed round the cream.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tania doth by the casement linger</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And breathes upon the chilly glass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dreaming of what not, pretty lass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And traces with a slender finger</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon its damp opacity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mystic monogram, <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">O. E.</abbr></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-40" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</h3>
				<p>
					<span>In the meantime her spirit sinks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her weary eyes are filled with tears⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A horse’s hoofs she hears⁠—She shrinks!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nearer they come⁠—Eugene appears!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! than a spectre from the dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More swift the room Tattiana fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From hall to yard and garden flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not daring to cast back her eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She fears and like an arrow rushes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through park and meadow, wood and brake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bridge and alley to the lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brambles she snaps and lilacs crushes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flowerbeds skirts, the brook doth meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till out of breath upon a seat</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-41" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>She sank.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“He’s here! Eugene is here!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Merciful God, what will he deem?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet still her heart, which torments tear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Guards fondly hope’s uncertain dream.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She waits, on fire her trembling frame⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will he pursue?⁠—But no one came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She heard of servant-maids the note,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who in the orchards gathered fruit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Singing in chorus all the while.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(This by command; for it was found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>However cherries might abound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They disappeared by stealth and guile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So mouths they stopt with song, not fruit⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Device of rural minds acute!)</span>
				</p>
				<section id="canto-3-41-song" epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<h4 epub:type="title">The Maidens’ Song</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Young maidens, fair maidens,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Friends and companions,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Disport yourselves, maidens,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Arouse yourselves, fair ones.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Come sing we in chorus</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The secrets of maidens.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Allure the young gallant</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With dance and with song.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As we lure the young gallant,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Espy him approaching,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Disperse yourselves, darlings,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And pelt him with cherries,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With cherries, red currants,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With raspberries, cherries.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Approach not to hearken</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To secrets of virgins,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Approach not to gaze at</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The frolics of maidens.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-42" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>They sang, whilst negligently seated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attentive to the echoing sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana with impatience waited</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until her heart less high should bound⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till the fire in her cheek decreased;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But tremor still her frame possessed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor did her blushes fade away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More crimson every moment they.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus shines the wretched butterfly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With iridescent wing doth flap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When captured in a schoolboy’s cap;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus shakes the hare when suddenly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She from the winter corn espies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sportsman who in covert lies.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-43" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But finally she heaves a sigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rising from her bench proceeds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But scarce had turned the corner nigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which to the neighbouring alley leads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Eugene like a ghost did rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before her straight with roguish eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana faltered, and became</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarlet as burnt by inward flame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But this adventure’s consequence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-day, my friends, at any rate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am not strong enough to state;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, after so much eloquence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must take a walk and rest a bit⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some day I’ll somehow finish it.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
