<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto the Fourth: Rural Life</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal">the Fourth</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Rural Life<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-52" id="noteref-52" epub:type="noteref">52</a></p>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p xml:lang="fr">“La Morale est dans la nature des choses.”</p>
					<cite>Necker</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<section id="canto-4-1" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The less we love a lady fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The easier ’tis to gain her grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the more surely we ensnare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her in the pitfalls which we place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time was when cold seduction strove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To swagger as the art of love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Everywhere trumpeting its feats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not seeking love but sensual sweets.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But this amusement delicate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was worthy of that old baboon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our fathers used to dote upon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Lovelaces are out of date,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their glory with their heels of red</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And long perukes hath vanishèd.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-2" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>For who imposture can endure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A constant harping on one tune,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Serious endeavours to assure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What everybody long has known;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever to hear the same replies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And overcome antipathies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which never have existed, e’en</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In little maidens of thirteen?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what like menaces fatigues,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Entreaties, oaths, fictitious fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Epistles of six sheets or near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rings, tears, deceptions and intrigues,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aunts, mothers and their scrutiny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And husbands’ tedious amity?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-3" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Such were the musings of Eugene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He in the early years of life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had a deluded victim been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of error and the passions’ strife.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By daily life deteriorated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awhile this beauty captivated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that no longer could inspire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slowly exhausted by desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet satiated with success,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In solitude or worldly din,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He heard his soul’s complaint within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With laughter smothered weariness:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus he spent eight years of time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Destroyed the blossom of his prime.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-4" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Though beauty he no more adored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He still made love in a queer way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rebuffed⁠—as quickly reassured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jilted⁠—glad of a holiday.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without enthusiasm he met</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fair, nor parted with regret,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarce mindful of their love and guile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus a guest with composure will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take a hand at whist oft come:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He takes his seat, concludes his game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And straight returning whence he came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tranquilly goes to sleep at home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the morning doth not know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whither that evening he will go.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-5" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>
					<span>However, Tania’s letter reading,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eugene was touched with sympathy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The language of her girlish pleading</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aroused in him sweet reverie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He called to mind Tattiana’s grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pallid and melancholy face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in a vision, sinless, bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His spirit sank with strange delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May be the empire of the sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Regained authority awhile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he desired not to beguile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such open-hearted innocence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to the garden once again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein we lately left the twain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-6" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Two minutes they in silence spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin then approached and said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“You have a letter to me sent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do not excuse yourself. I read</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confessions which a trusting heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May well in innocence impart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charming is your sincerity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feelings which long had ceased to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It wakens in my breast again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I came not to adulate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your frankness I shall compensate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By an avowal just as plain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An ear to my confession lend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thy decree my will I bend.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-7" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“If the domestic hearth could bless⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sum of happiness contained;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If wife and children to possess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A happy destiny ordained:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If in the scenes of home I might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’en for an instant find delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, I say truly, none but thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would desire my bride to be⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say without poetic phrase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Found the ideal of my youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee only would I choose, in truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As partner of my mournful days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee only, pledge of all things bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be as happy⁠—as I might.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-8" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“But strange am I to happiness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis foreign to my cast of thought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me your perfections would not bless;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am not worthy them in aught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And honestly ’tis my belief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our union would produce but grief.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though now my love might be intense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Habit would bring indifference.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see you weep. Those tears of yours</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tend not my heart to mitigate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But merely to exasperate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Judge then what roses would be ours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What pleasures Hymen would prepare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For us, may be for many a year.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-9" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“What can be drearier than the house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein the miserable wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deplores a most unworthy spouse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And leads a solitary life?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tiresome man, her value knowing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet curses on his fate bestowing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is full of frigid jealousy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mute, solemn, frowning gloomily.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such am I. This did ye expect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When in simplicity ye wrote</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your innocent and charming note</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With so much warmth and intellect?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath fate apportioned unto thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This lot in life with stern decree?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-10" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Ideas and time ne’er backward move;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul I cannot renovate⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I love you with a brother’s love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perchance one more affectionate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Listen to me without disdain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A maid hath oft, may yet again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Replace the visions fancy drew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus trees in spring their leaves renew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in their turn the seasons roll.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis evidently Heaven’s will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You fall in love again. But still⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Learn to possess more self-control.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not all will like myself proceed⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thoughtlessness to woe might lead.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-11" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thus did our friend Onegin preach:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana, dim with tears her eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attentive listened to his speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All breathless and without replies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His arm he offers. Mute and sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(<em>Mechanically</em>, let us add),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana doth accept his aid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, hanging down her head, the maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around the garden homeward hies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Together they returned, nor word</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of censure for the same incurred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The country hath its liberties</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And privileges nice allowed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as Moscow, city proud.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-12" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Confess, O ye who this peruse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onegin acted very well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By poor Tattiana in the blues;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas not the first time, I can tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You, he a noble mind disclosed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though some men, evilly disposed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spared him not their asperities.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His friends and also enemies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(One and the same thing it may be)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Esteemed him much as the world goes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes! every one must have his foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Lord! from friends deliver me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The deuce take friends, my friends, amends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve had to make for having friends!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-13" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But how? Quite so. Though I dismiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dark, unavailing reverie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I just hint, in parenthesis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no stupid calumny</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Born of a babbler in a loft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by the world repeated oft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no fishmarket retort</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And no ridiculous report,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which your true friend with a sweet smile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where fashionable circles meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hundred times will not repeat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quite inadvertently meanwhile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet he in your cause would strive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And loves you as⁠—a relative!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-14" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Ahem! Ahem! My reader noble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are all your relatives quite well?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Permit me; is it worth the trouble</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For your instruction here to tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What I by relatives conceive?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These are your relatives, believe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those whom we ought to love, caress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With spiritual tenderness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom, as the custom is of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We visit about Christmas Day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or by a card our homage pay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That until Christmas comes again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They may forget that we exist.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so⁠—God bless them, if He list.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-15" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>In this the love of the fair sex</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beats that of friends and relatives:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In love, although its tempests vex,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our liberty at least survives:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Agreed! but then the whirl of fashion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The natural fickleness of passion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The torrent of opinion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the fair sex as light as down!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides the hobbies of a spouse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should be respected throughout life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By every proper-minded wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this the faithful one allows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When in an instant she is lost⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Satan will jest, and at love’s cost.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-16" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Oh! where bestow our love? Whom trust?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where is he who doth not deceive?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who words and actions will adjust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To standards in which we believe?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! who is not calumnious?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who labours hard to humour us?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom are our misfortunes grief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And who is not a tiresome thief?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My venerated reader, oh!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cease the pursuit of shadows vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spare yourself unavailing pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all your love on self bestow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A worthy object ’tis, and well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know there’s none more amiable.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-17" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But from the interview what flowed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! It is not hard to guess.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The insensate fire of love still glowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor discontinued to distress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A spirit which for sorrow yearned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana more than ever burned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hopeless passion: from her bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet slumber winged its way and fled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her health, life’s sweetness and its bloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her smile and maidenly repose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All vanished as an echo goes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Across her youth a shade had come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when the tempest’s veil is drawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Across the smiling face of dawn.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-18" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Alas! Tattiana fades away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grows pale and sinks, but nothing says;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Listless is she the livelong day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor interest in aught betrays.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shaking with serious air the head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In whispers low the neighbours said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis time she to the altar went!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But enough! Now, ’tis my intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The imagination to enliven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With love which happiness extends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against my inclination, friends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By sympathy I have been driven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgive me! Such the love I bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heroine, Tattiana dear.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-19" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Vladimir, hourly more a slave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To youthful Olga’s beauty bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into delicious bondage gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His ardent soul with full delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Always together, eventide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Found them in darkness side by side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At morn, hand clasped in hand, they rove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around the meadow and the grove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what resulted? Drunk with love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with confused and bashful air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lenski at intervals would dare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Olga smilingly approve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dally with a dishevelled tress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or kiss the border of her dress.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-20" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>To Olga frequently he would</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some nice instructive novel read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose author nature understood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better than Chateaubriand did</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet sometimes pages two or three</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Nonsense and pure absurdity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For maiden’s hearing deemed unfit),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He somewhat blushing would omit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from the rest the pair would creep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And (elbows on the table) they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A game of chess would often play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Buried in meditation deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till absently Vladimir took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his own pawn alas! his rook!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-21" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Homeward returning, he at home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is occupied with Olga fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An album, fly-leaf of the tome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He leisurely adorns for her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Landscapes thereon he would design,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tombstone, Aphrodite’s shrine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, with a pen and colours fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dove which on a lyre doth sit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The “in memoriam” pages sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where many another hand had signed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tender couplet he combined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A register of fleeting thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A flimsy trace of musings past</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which might for many ages last.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-22" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Surely ye all have overhauled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A country damsel’s album trim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which all her darling friends have scrawled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From first to last page to the rim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold! orthography despising,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Metreless verses recognizing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By friendship how they were abused,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hewn, hacked, and otherwise ill-used.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the opening page ye find:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i xml:lang="fr">Qu’ecrirer-vouz sur ces tablettes?</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Subscribed, <i xml:lang="fr">toujours à vous, Annette;</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the last one, underlined:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>Who in thy love finds more delight</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>Beyond this may attempt to write</em>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-23" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Infallibly you there will find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two hearts, a torch, of flowers a wreath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And vows will probably be signed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Affectionately yours till death</i>.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some army poet therein may</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have smuggled his flagitious lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In such an album with delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would, my friends, inscriptions write,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because I should be sure, meanwhile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My verses, kindly meant, would earn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delighted glances in return;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That afterwards with evil smile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They would not solemnly debate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If cleverly or not I prate.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-24" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But, O ye tomes without compare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which from the devil’s bookcase start,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Albums magnificent which scare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fashionable rhymester’s heart!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea! although rendered beauteous</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Tolstoy’s pencil marvellous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though Baratynski verses penned,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-53" id="noteref-53" epub:type="noteref">53</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thunderbolt on you descend!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whene’er a brilliant courtly dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Presents her quarto amiably,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Despair and anger seize on me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a malicious epigram</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trembles upon my lips from spite⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And madrigals I’m asked to write!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-25" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But Lenski madrigals ne’er wrote</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Olga’s album, youthful maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To purest love he tuned his note</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor frigid adulation paid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What never was remarked or heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Olga he in song averred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His elegies, which plenteous streamed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both natural and truthful seemed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus thou, Yazykoff, dost arise<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-54" id="noteref-54" epub:type="noteref">54</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In amorous flights when so inspired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Singing God knows what maid admired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all thy precious elegies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometime collected, shall relate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The story of thy life and fate.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-26" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Since Fame and Freedom he adored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Incited by his stormy Muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Odes Lenski also had outpoured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Olga would not such peruse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When poets lachrymose recite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the eyes of ladies bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their own productions, some insist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No greater pleasure can exist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just so! that modest swain is blest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who reads his visionary theme</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the fair object of his dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A beauty languidly at rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, happy⁠—though she at his side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By other thoughts be occupied.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-27" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But I the products of my Muse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Consisting of harmonious lays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To my old nurse alone peruse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Companion of my childhood’s days.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, after dinner’s dull repast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I by the button-hole seize fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My neighbour, who by chance drew near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And breathe a drama in his ear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else (I deal not here in jokes),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exhausted by my woes and rhymes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sail upon my lake at times</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And terrify a swarm of ducks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, heard the music of my lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take to their wings and fly away.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-28" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But to Onegin! <em>A propos!</em></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Friends, I must your indulgence pray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His daily occupations, lo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Minutely I will now portray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hermit’s life Onegin led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At seven in summer rose from bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And clad in airy costume took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His course unto the running brook.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, aping Gulnare’s bard, he spanned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His Hellespont from bank to bank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then a cup of coffee drank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some wretched journal in his hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then dressed himself⁠ ⁠…<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-55" id="noteref-55" epub:type="noteref">55</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-29" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Sound sleep, books, walking, were his bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The murmuring brook, the woodland shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The uncontaminated kiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a young dark-eyed country maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fiery, yet well-broken horse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dinner, whimsical each course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bottle of a vintage white</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And solitude and calm delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such was Onegin’s sainted life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And such unconsciously he led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor marked how summer’s prime had fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In aimless ease and far from strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The curse of commonplace delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And town and friends forgotten quite.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-30" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>This northern summer of our own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On winters of the south a skit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glimmers and dies. This is well known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though we will not acknowledge it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already Autumn chilled the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tiny sun shone less on high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shorter had the days become.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The forests in mysterious gloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were stripped with melancholy sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the earth a mist did lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many a caravan on high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of clamorous geese flew southward bound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A weary season was at hand⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>November at the gate did stand.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-31" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The morn arises foggy, cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silent fields no peasant nears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wolf upon the highways bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his ferocious mate appears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Detecting him the passing horse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Snorts, and his rider bends his course</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wisely gallops to the hill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more at dawn the shepherd will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drive out the cattle from their shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor at the hour of noon with sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of horn in circle call them round.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Singing inside her hut the maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spins, whilst the friend of wintry night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pine-torch, by her crackles bright.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-32" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Already crisp hoar frosts impose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er all a sheet of silvery dust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Readers expect the rhyme of <em>rose</em>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There! take it quickly, if ye must).</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold! than polished floor more nice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shining river clothed in ice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A joyous troop of little boys</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Engrave the ice with strident noise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A heavy goose on scarlet feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thinking to float upon the stream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Descends the bank with care extreme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But staggers, slips, and falls. We greet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first bright wreathing storm of snow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which falls in starry flakes below.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-33" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>How in the country pass this time?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Walking? The landscape tires the eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In winter by its blank and dim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And naked uniformity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On horseback gallop o’er the steppe!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your steed, though rough-shod, cannot keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His footing on the treacherous rime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And may fall headlong any time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone beneath your rooftree stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And read De Pradt or Walter Scott!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-56" id="noteref-56" epub:type="noteref">56</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keep your accounts! You’d rather not?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then get mad drunk or wroth; the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will pass; the same to-morrow try⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’ll spend your winter famously!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-34" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>A true Childe Harold my Eugene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To idle musing was a prey;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At morn an icy bath within</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sat, and then the livelong day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone within his habitation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And buried deep in meditation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He round the billiard-table stalked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The balls impelled, the blunt cue chalked;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When evening o’er the landscape looms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Billiards abandoned, cue forgot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A table to the fire is brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he waits dinner. Lenski comes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Driving abreast three horses gray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Bring dinner now without delay!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-35" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Upon the table in a trice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of widow Clicquot or Moet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A blessed bottle, placed in ice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the young poet they display.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Hippocrene it scatters light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its ebullition foaming white</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Like other things I could relate)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heart of old would captivate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The last poor obol I was worth⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was it not so?⁠—for thee I gave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy inebriating wave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full many a foolish prank brought forth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And oh! what verses, what delights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delicious visions, jests and fights!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-36" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Alas! my stomach it betrays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With its exhilarating flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I confess that now-a-days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I prefer sensible Bordeaux.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cope with Ay no more I dare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Ay is like a mistress fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seductive, animated, bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wilful, frivolous, and light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou, Bordeaux, art like the friend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who in the agony of grief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is ever ready with relief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assistance ever will extend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or quietly partake our woe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All hail! my good old friend Bordeaux!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-37" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The fire sinks low. An ashy cloak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The golden ember now enshrines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And barely visible the smoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upward in a thin stream inclines.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But little warmth the fireplace lends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tobacco smoke the flue ascends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goblet still is bubbling bright⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outside descend the mists of night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How pleasantly the evening jogs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When o’er a glass with friends we prate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just at the hour we designate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The time between the wolf and dogs⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot tell on what pretence⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But lo! the friends to chat commence.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-38" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“How are our neighbours fair, pray tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tattiana, saucy Olga thine?”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The family are all quite well⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give me just half a glass of wine⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They sent their compliments⁠—but oh!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How charming Olga’s shoulders grow!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her figure perfect grows with time!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She is an angel! We sometime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must visit them. Come! you must own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My friend, ’tis but to pay a debt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For twice you came to them and yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You never since your nose have shown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But stay! A dolt am I who speak!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They have invited you this week.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-39" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Me?”⁠—“Yes! It is Tattiana’s fête</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Next Saturday. The Làrina</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Told me to ask you. Ere that date</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make up your mind to go there.”⁠—“Ah!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It will be by a mob beset</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of every sort and every set!”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Not in the least, assured am I!”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Who will be there?”⁠—“The family.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do me a favour and appear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will you?”⁠—“Agreed.”⁠—“I thank you, friend,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saying this Vladimir drained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His cup unto his maiden dear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then touching Olga they depart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In fresh discourse. Such, love, thou art!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-40" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</h3>
				<p>
					<span>He was most gay. The happy date</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In three weeks would arrive for them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The secrets of the marriage state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And love’s delicious diadem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With rapturous longing he awaits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor in his dreams anticipates</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hymen’s embarrassments, distress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And freezing fits of weariness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though we, of Hymen foes, meanwhile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In life domestic see a string</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of pictures painful harrowing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A novel in Lafontaine’s style,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My wretched Lenski’s fate I mourn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He seemed for matrimony born.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-41" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>He was beloved: or say at least,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He thought so, and existence charmed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The credulous indeed are blest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he who, jealousy disarmed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sensual sweets his soul doth steep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As drunken tramps at nightfall sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, parable more flattering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As butterflies to blossoms cling.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wretched who anticipates,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose brain no fond illusions daze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who every gesture, every phrase</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In true interpretation hates:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose heart experience icy made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet oblivion forbade.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
